<header>
<h2 epub:type="title">
        Part <span epub type="z3998:roman">I</span>
        <span epub:type="subtitle">Introductory</span>
</h2>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
        <p>They crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put Him to an open shame.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>And behold, within the centremost court of Heaven, all music had ceased, and the multitudes waited with bowed heads, under a silence deep with agony, for this was the hour when the prayers of men ascended to the Throne, and none dared to lift his eyes to the face of the Christ God, seated at the right hand of the Majesty of Glory.</p>
<p>But the Child, with eyes aflame with purest Love, passed through the throng, and none heard the sound of his naked feet, nor felt the touch of his soft raiment as he went.</p>
<p>And the Child kneeled before the Christ God and gazed up into His face.</p>
<p>And suddenly a great passion of adoring sympathy broke forth upon the Child, for he saw that the scars upon the forehead of the Christ God burned with agony, and that the wounds upon His hands and His feet were re-opened blood-red.</p>
<p>Yet in His eyes, he saw neither doubt nor fear, but only the uttermost assurance of triumph; and as he bent low to kiss the wounded feet, the Christ God raised him to His side, and folded him within His arm.</p>
<p>“What would’st thou, my Child?”</p>
<p>“I would, O Christ God, that mine ears might be unlocked, so that I might understand this silence,” whispered the Child, “and I would also know—”</p>
<p>“Fear not to tell Me, thy King!”</p>
<p>“I would know, O Christ God, why the scars on Thy forehead burn with agony, and why the wounds upon Thy hands and Thy feet are blood-red.”</p>
<p>“Thou seest my wounds blood-red, because my children who profess My Name, have woven a thick veil of untruth between the peoples and Myself. Thus am I wounded in the house of My friends.”</p>
<p>“Then—is there naught I can do to serve Thee?” pleaded the Child.</p>
<p>“Art thou willing to bear sorrow for My sake, as thou did’st once before?” and the Christ God smiled the smile of Heaven.</p>
<p>“Thou knowest, O Christ God, that wherever Thou would’st send me, there I will go!” Yet the Child trembled within the arm that enfolded him.</p>
<p>And the silence was deep in the Heavens for the space of an hour, and the Child waited in uttermost patience.</p>
<p>“O Christ God !” he pleaded at last, “that I might bring healing to Thy wounds!”</p>
<p><em>“It is through the wounding of love, that love will prevail!”</em> answered the Christ God.</p>
<p>“I cannot understand!” faltered the Child.</p>
<p>“Neither do my children upon earth understand! Kneel, and thou shalt hear.”</p>
<p>And the Christ God touched the ears of the Child, as he bent low to listen.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
        <p>When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide Mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear; your hands are full of blood.</p>
        <p>If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land; but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured by the sword, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>“Victory! Victory! O God of righteousness and honor!” The words thundered into the Child’s ear, as though from a million throats. “Confound our enemies! Strengthen our right arm, O God of Battles, that when we uplift Thy glittering sword, we may bring our enemies to the dust, that Thou mayest reign in righteousness amongst all nations!”</p>
<p>“For King! For Country! For Fatherland! For Home! For Wife! For Child! O God, hear from Thy dwelling place!”</p>
<p>“God! Help me to strike! Help me to blow them limb from limb—the devils—O God! Have mercy upon us all!”</p>
<p>“God Almighty! Come on, you seed of the devil! Come on, you hell hounds! A million of you—we’re readv! Now—in the Name of Christ—”</p>
<p>“Merciful Saviour! Hast Thou not one drop of water, before—”</p>
<p>“Gracious Father, we humbly pray that Thou wilt give Thy holy angels charge to succour and defend our sailors, our soldiers, and airmen, in all their dangers and temptations.”</p>
<p>“O God! Give me strength to get this poor chap out of this!”</p>
<p>“Almighty Father! Thou Who alone doest perfect righteousness, we thank Thee for the blessed assurance that victory is certain for our Nation, for Thy great glory’s sake. Bless our guns, our shells, our bombs, our ships, our mines, and all and every means by which our rulers determine to overthrow the enemy. In the Name of Jesus Christ we ask it. Amen!”</p>
<p>“Christ! O Mother of Christ! Save! Save! She is my mother—my sister! O Jesu— the children! They come! They are here! Ah—damn you! Curse you! Beast! Brute! If—”</p>
<p>“O Holy Father, Thou who alone knowest the wickedness of our enemies, pour out upon them that punishment which is their due, and mercifully continue Thy favours to us, Thy children, warring for Thy truth. In the Name of our Crucified Saviour.”</p>
<p>“O Holy Father! Endue these Thy noble sons, about to go forth to lay down their lives for Thy sake, with power from on high. Give them courage and skill to overcome their foes, and lead them not into temptation, but deliver them from evil. Amen!”</p>
<p>“O Mighty God! We thank Thee that Thou hast delivered unto us the secret of true greatness. We thank Thee that we are not as others—even as this enemy! Are not our hands clean in this great conflict, and our ways honorable? Stand by us in the hour of need, that through our victory, we may lead the world into Thy truth.”</p>
<p>“O Holy Father! We are assured that we are Thy chosen people, brought forth by Heaven’s command to dominate the earth and the seas. Let not other nations fulfil their foul designs against us. Curse them in their madness, and bring them to a wise submission to Thy holy will.”</p>
<p>“O God of Battles! Deliver us, we beseech Thee from the dangers descending upon us, through those who would cry ‘Peace’ when there is no peace. Confound their base endeavours, and let them not strengthen the hands of our enemies, nor lay Thy honor in the dust!”</p>
<p>Then the Child lifted up his eyes beseechingly, as though he would hear no more.</p>
<p>“Yet listen once again, my Child! There are other voices.”</p>
<p>And a woman’s cry rang upwards to the throne.</p>
<p>“Forgive us, as we forgive! O Christ! Teach me what this means! They have killed my boy—my only son—O God, dost Thou not know that I cannot bear it? Avenge me on their noblest—No! No! Merciful Father forgive! Make not another woman’s heart desolate as mine!”</p>
<p>“O God! Light! Give Light! Must I kill? I cannot kill! Is there no other way? They tell me in Thy Church, that Thy righteousness can only reign on earth, through trampling the Christ, we once knew, under foot! Is there some new Christ? Light! O God!”</p>
<p>“Gentle Jesus. Stop this war. It is wicked. Everybody knows it is wicked. You, Gentle Jesus must hate it so. Won’t You please stop it before my Daddy has to kill anybody—please!”</p>
<p>“God! Is it true that Faith and Hope and Love are vanquished, and that Fear rules the world? Send us a sign that Thou art still in the Heavens!”</p>
<p>“Thou art still on the Throne, O Christ God!” whispered the Child.</p>
<p>“I am eternally on the Throne!”</p>
<p>“What then, is this Fear that rules mankind, O Christ God?”</p>
<p>“Would’st thou dare to enter the Halls of Fear for My sake?”</p>
<p>The Child’s face shone with pure joy, as he answered: “If that would serve Thee, O King!”</p>
<p>“He that serveth my brothers and sisters, serveth Me!”</p>
<p>“That is enough, O King of Truth!” and the Child kissed the pierced feet.</p>
<p>“And thou fearest not the Fear?”</p>
<p>“What is this Fear?” faltered the Child.</p>
<p>“Thou shalt learn!” and the Christ God drew a circle round the Child’s head with His finger.</p>
<p>“Now thou art crowned with Love, for Perfect Love has all power to cast out Fear. Go thy way, and learn the meaning of ‘The Last Weapon’ offered to men by the Prince of Fear and ‘The Last Weapon’ offered by the Saviour of the World.”</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
        <p>He was a slayer of men from the very beginning, and he has no place in the Truth, because there is no Truth in him. When he tells lies, he is expressing his own nature, for he is a liar and the father of lies.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>And as the Child entered the Halls of Fear, he quivered shrinkingly, under a strange benumbing oppression.</p>
<p>A leaden horror, heavy as an ocean of darkness, descended upon him, and panting for breath, he sank upon his knees and buried his face in his hands.</p>
<p>As he kneeled, he understood Fear, and perceived that the Spirit of Love cannot breathe its atmosphere.</p>
<p>“O merciful Christ God!” he groaned.</p>
<p>“Hast thou forgotten so soon that thou art crowned with the Sign of the Pierced Hand?” whispered a voice reprovingly.</p>
<p>The Child leaped to his feet, and threw back the burden of Fear, as a strong swimmer dashes the sea from his brow, and lifting his eyes towards the massing darkness, behold, his face was full of light.</p>
<p>And all around him, there was the sound of tramping feet and the clamor of voices, and a wild din of music that shrivelled the soul: for from all points, a mighty throng was surging through the dimness of the outer halls, bound for the innermost centre of all, and the Child, invisible, passed onward with them, knowing that this was his way.</p>
<p>He noticed that the dark visaged beings about him were richly clad in garments which were stained and torn. They were jewelled with gems which bore no light, and on each forehead was a star which did not shine. On all faces there was pride and beauty and eager desire after something ever out of reach, and each eye was darkened with the furtive look of eternal vigilance, for none trusted his neighbour, lest any should snatch from him the treasure he bore.</p>
<p>The Child saw that the innermost Hall was so vast that its sable columns were lost in the grey distance, and when, suddenly, the music ceased, the noise of the trampling feet was stilled, and a restless silence hovered, as the mist-waves wreathed and struck icily about the faces of the massed multitudes, for all looked towards the throne, still canopied in darkness.</p>
<p>A flash of light—glorious as the Morning in his strength. A roar of fiercest greeting, and the Child found himself standing alone amidst the beings who threw themselves upon their faces.</p>
<p>The Prince of Fear had ascended his throne, strong in limb, wonderful in countenance, clothed with radiant mail, and bearing in his right hand the lightning shafts which none beneath his sway may withstand.</p>
<p>The Child saw that the star upon his forehead did not shine, and in spite of the pride in his bearing, he read resentful terror lurking in his eyes. Gazing spell-bound, he became aware that two other figures, one clothed in black and the other in crimson, advanced behind the Prince and stood at attention.</p>
<p>The Prince regarded the motionless throng with an expression of disdainful and cruel mockery; then he spoke out in a marvellous voice of echoing splendour.</p>
<p>“Rise up, ye Sons of Fear! Is not this the hour of our triumph?”</p>
<p>Instantly the multitudes leaped to their feet, and yelled forth savage howls of passionate devotion, and the Prince’s whole aspect changed to one of gracious and flattering intimacy, as he stepped forward and flung his lightning shafts down at his feet.</p>
<p>“Eternal triumph to the Prince of Fear!” rolled in a thunder peal through the halls.</p>
<p>The Prince smiled alluringly, and lifted his hand for silence.</p>
<p>“Ye have done well, my Sons!” he cried, “but ye must do better. Our time is shortening, the crisis is advancing upon us. Our wise strategy has, so far, been overwhelmingly successful, but beware! At any hour, that other Force, at present crushed back and despised, may arise, as an inspiration to men to pluck up heart to bring ruin to our last and most stupendous endeavour! Let me—” and the Prince clenched an outstretched hand—“remind you of the source of our power.</p>
<p>“Behold me, the Prince of Fear! By Fear, I bind you, my faithful Sons in an eternal bondage! By Fear I bind men to follow me with passionate loyalty, in my never-dying conflict for world-authority with the Unnameable One.</p>
<p>“Fools that men are!” and the Prince laughed triumphantly. “Deluded to their own undoing! We have taught them to doubt the secret of their own power, and thus—we reign!</p>
<p>“Remember ye not, how the Unnameable One Himself once descended to Earth, that He might wrest my weapons out of their hands? Yet men clutched them the tighter, and because He refused to use them, they hung Him up to the scorn and derision of the world!</p>
<p>“So today, we hide the Truth from men, but in the Halls of Fear, we can sport with the dangerous secret!</p>
<p>“For behold! All evil—every evil for which we stand, is conquerable by Love alone.</p>
<p>“Love is Fearless, greedless, selfless. Love links man to man and casts down the barriers of nationality, class, and race, which we have spent ourselves in building up from the beginning. Perfect Love is invincible.</p>
<p>“But men do not yet know Perfect Love. In this hour of their terror, we let men talk of Love, admire Love, worship Love, even as we thrust our weapons into their hands to fight on behalf of Love! We care not that men mock at Fear, hate Fear, scorn Fear, fear Fear, so long as they cling to the weapons of Fear as their only salvation!”</p>
<p>Wild applause greeted the mocking sally, and the dark figures behind the throne stepped out boldly to the right and left of their Prince.</p>
<p>“Yet remember, my faithful Sons, it is but poor warcraft to underrate the enemy.</p>
<p>“Though the Unnameable One went under, scorned as a traitor to His country, He left behind Him a cursed seed of rebellion against my authority.</p>
<p>“Love, breeding fellowship, co-operation, goodwill—in fact, all the principles we hate, has been working amongst men for long centuries, usurping our kingdom, wherever men have torn aside the veil which we have taught them to weave between themselves and the Unnameable One.</p>
<p>“The rent is widening—the cursed Light is shining through. That is why it has been necessary to make haste!</p>
<p>“Even a year ago, we feared that our task was beyond our power. But behold, you, my Sons, have gone to and fro on the earth, whispering ambition, ease, suspicion, greed, terror, revenge, honor, self-sacrifice—love, even as you glorified our weapons which we had taught mankind to forge. What matter that some were eager, and some reluctant! They are all conscripts to our service!</p>
<p>“We had indeed wondered whether the followers of the Unnameable One would stand out and trouble our hosts; but it is amongst these that we have achieved our most significant success, for have we not captured the spirit of highest human Love and noblest devotion to the Unnameable One, and bound it captive to the Prince of Fear?</p>
<p>“Behold now, the loyalty of these subjects to their King!</p>
<p>“He has commanded them to overcome all evil with good!</p>
<p>“We have whispered ‘Folly!’ and they have believed.</p>
<p>“He has told them to love their enemies. We have urged, that to slay their enemies is to die for the Unnameable One!</p>
<p>“He has warned them that if they forgive not men their trespasses, neither will He forgive them. We have sent them by millions to their knees to pray that our weapons may prosper in His service!</p>
<p>“He has told them that He cannot hear, so long as their hands are full of blood. We have persuaded them. to offer up their brother’s blood as a holy sacrifice in the name of Love!</p>
<p>“He has told them that a tree is known by its fruits. We tell them that the poison-fruit they now see, is but ripening into a heavenly fruit for the healing of the nations!</p>
<p>“He has told them that the Makers of Peace are blessed. We have roused His followers in all nations to brand the Makers of Peace as traitors to their fellows, and to proclaim, even unto the dark places of the earth, that only by obedience to me, can the Prince of Peace come into His Kingdom!</p>
<p>“He has told them that the poor are blessed. We have warned them that the poor can only be blessed through the domination of the mighty!</p>
<p>“He has forbidden them to lay up treasures for themselves on earth. We have taught them that their only security for a life worth living comes through possession!</p>
<p>“He has told them that the chiefest amongst them is he who serves. We have told them that the only hope for any nation is to dominate.</p>
<p>“He has roused the youth of all nations to an enthusiasm for righteousness. We have prostituted this enthusiasm, by alluring them to use the methods of wild beasts—devils if you will! And thousands—perhaps millions of them—the young fools—have broken their hearts when they discovered the lie—but then, it was too late!”—and the Prince led the shout of laughter.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
        <p>Wrath is cruelty, and anger is an overflowing.<br />For Satan himself is also transformed into an angel of Light.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>“Yes, my Sons! Our work prospers. Day by day and night by night we shatter the image of the Unnameable One upon a thousand hills. We care not which side conquers! We only know that the army which is most expert in the use of our weapons must be the victor.</p>
<p>“As a reward for faithful service, we have bound our weapons to the hands of mankind, and compelled them to cling to them with enthusiastic yet terrified devotion. Not the mightiest nation amongst them dares to let go—dares to stretch forth a hand to the enemy, armed only with fearless Love!</p>
<p>“Now and then, some heart-broken or conscience-stricken fool drops his arms with a cry of shame, but we see to it that he is torn to pieces by his fellows—curse him!”</p>
<p>And suddenly the black-robed figure of Despair leaped forward and flourished the banner of Death, amidst the wild cheers of the crowd.</p>
<p>“And should they falter,” the Prince continued in a curiously intense voice, “we can ever spur them forward to their doom by instigating some fresh horror wrought by our weapons, which serves as a clarion call to young and old to spring to our banner in the Name of the Unnameable One.”</p>
<p>And the Child saw that he of the crimson robe, Cruelty by name, stood forth with clenched hands and horrible gestures, that he also might receive his ovation of honor.</p>
<p>“My children!” the Prince spoke in a low penetrating voice, “in very delusion, the sons of men arm themselves as a sign of their courage. In very truth, they arm themselves as a sign that they have faith alone in me, and none in the Unnameable One! So it ever will be, O my children, unless—”</p>
<p>His eyes roved about the Hall, and came to rest upon the spot where the Child stood. Whether he saw him or not, the Child could not tell, but suddenly the Prince’s eyes darted fire, and he broke out wildly:—</p>
<p>“Unless—the secret of Love breaks forth and overwhelms us!”</p>
<p>“There is possibility of that, O Prince?” broke in Despair, as he dropped to one knee.</p>
<p>“The secret is working!” answered he, motioning his follower aside. “When men and women see the Light, they push us from them with startled eyes. Be on the alert! Wherever ye see signs of this spirit, crush and terrify it if ye can, and if not, calm it by whispered words of confidence in the righteousness of the cause. For, believe me! Should men win this spirit, fearless of all consequences, even as the Unnameable was fearless, <em>we</em> are lost! They will arise and scatter us and possess the Kingdom.</p>
<p>“But the battle is still with us! These foes are yet without faith, and creep along the byways of the world, deluded by our whisperings that they have no power. In every nation such are longing to find their fellows. We must keep them apart at all costs. How ye deal with them, matters not. Ye may slay them with mockery, perplexity, diffidence, procrastination, national loyalty, family love, pride in our noblest victims—doubt of the Unnameable One—so long as ye hinder them from weakening the world’s grasp upon our weapons!</p>
<p>“Today, the slaughter and ruin makes men but struggle after us the more desperately. Yet we know that everything they think they are fighting for is being destroyed, even as they fight! That is our triumph. That is the crown upon my brow, whilst His drops blood!</p>
<p>“But now behold, we must bring forth our Last Weapon!” and the Prince gathered up the lightning darts from the dais of the throne.</p>
<p>“From nation to nation ye must go, my Sons, urging that the hour is come when some new method of destruction must be brought forth which will achieve certain victory. Can ye but delude each nation to accept this Power which men will call Hellite, then is my triumph complete!</p>
<p>“Hasten—be diligent in my service, for should the peoples in their agony begin to cry to the Unnameable One in repentance for their sin—should they appeal for the weapons of Almighty Love, then—”</p>
<p><em>“When they thus cry, He will arise and scatter His foes, and destroy the oppressor of His people for ever!”</em></p>
<p>So the Child’s voice rang out fearlessly, and even as he cried, all saw him.</p>
<p>Swiftly the Prince seized his lightning darts and flung them, one by one, at the Child.</p>
<p>“The Weapons of Fear are powerless against Almighty Love!” cried the Child. “I also go down to Earth, I also teach men the use of the Last Weapon! In the Name of the Unnameable One, the Christ God—”</p>
<p>But even as the Child uttered the Name, he was alone in the Halls of Fear.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 epub:type="title">
        Part <span epub type="z3998:roman">II</span>
</h2>
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
        <p>For this is a people robbed and spoiled, in snaring all the young men of them, and they are hid in prison houses, they are for a prey, and none delivereth: and for a spoil and none saith “Restore.” Who among you will give ear to this? Who will hearken and hear for the after-time?</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>“My sweet, you have hurt yourself!”</p>
<p>The blue-eyed baby rushed across the daisied lawn with a cry, and hid her rosy face in her mother’s lap, so that she might be kissed and comforted and “made better.”</p>
<p>Thus, cheered to happiness once more, she shook back her curls and looked round to discover more sunny joy.</p>
<p>And the Child noticed a tall broad-shouldered young man pause on the steps which led down from the terrace of the old Manor House.</p>
<p>He had watched the little scene between mother and daughter with a strange expression of pain in his eyes.</p>
<p>“O Uncle David,” shouted Dolly rapturously. “There you are! Now you can swing me!”</p>
<p>“You tyrant!” he laughed. Then he rushed down the steps, and catching his niece up in his strong arms, he popped her into the swing and swung her higher and higher, until her toes touched the beech leaves, and she shrieked in purest bliss.</p>
<p>But authority, in the form of a matronly nurse, intervened, and after repeated huggings and kissings, the little girl was torn off to bed, and the brother and sister were left alone save for the invisible Child, who had flung himself down on the grass at their feet.</p>
<p>“Well?” asked the sister, looking at her brother challengingly. “Decided?”</p>
<p>“No, Katie.”</p>
<p>“You are perfectly unaccountable!” she answered him restlessly. “If only I were a man! Why David—how can you doubt for a single moment?”</p>
<p>“That is the anguish!” he said, fixing his eyes unknowingly upon the Child.</p>
<p>“But now—after all this dreadful news—worse and worse every time we open a paper! Don’t you see—suppose these fiends were—well—were doing things to mother and Dolly?”</p>
<p>“Or to you, little sister?”</p>
<p>“That is it!” she replied, eagerly pressing her point. “You know perfectly well that you would—”</p>
<p>“Yes—I know I would—”</p>
<p>“Then, why not—”</p>
<p>“<em>He</em> didn’t—”</p>
<p>“Who didn’t?” she puzzled. “O—h Christ you mean? But that <em>is</em> such nonsense, David—it really is! He was quite different from us, and if He had been here today, I am perfectly sure He would—”</p>
<p>“Train us in bayonet and bomb throwing?”</p>
<p>“Oh well—that isn’t a fair way of putting it! Besides, David, it really is absurd that you should set your opinion up against everyone! Our Church Rulers, and all the best people we know, are perfectly sure that we are right and that God is on our side. You won’t go to Church now, or you would have heard the most convincing sermon yesterday. Eight of the village boys came up afterwards, promising to enlist.”</p>
<p>He nodded, but said nothing.</p>
<p>“And besides—it is getting most frightfully awkward for me as I go about amongst the people, to know that I have a brother—just the very man we want, who won’t!” she looked at him anxiously.</p>
<p>“Yes, it is very awkward for you, Katie, I’m sorry!”</p>
<p>“If you would join the ambulance service—that would be better than nothing—that is—if you really <em>can’t</em> make up your mind to fight for your country!”</p>
<p>“If I go, I shall not hide myself even behind the heroism of a Red Cross, I shall go to the front and kill!” he said quickly.</p>
<p>“Oh, if only you would!”</p>
<p>“What a sigh !” he said kindly, as he laid his hand reassuringly on her knee. Then he rose. “Excuse me to mother, I shan’t be in to dinner.”</p>
<p>“But where are you going?”</p>
<p>“Into the outer darkness!” he laughed. Then he strode away.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Therefore the Lord will cut off Israel, head and tail, branch and root in one day.</p>
<p>The ancient and honorable, he is the head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail. For the leaders of this people cause them to err, and they that are called blessed of them are swallowed up.</p>
<p>Through the wrath of the Lord of hosts is the land darkened, and the people shall be as the fuel of fire—no man shall spare his brother.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>The Child followed David, as he took the path through the wood all burnished with evening glory.</p>
<p>The sun stared and shot arrows into his eyes, so that even as he closed his lids, his eyeballs burned blood-red.</p>
<p>“Even the very heavens are aflame from Hell!” he ejaculated, as he re-opened his eyes. “Katie is right! There is no other way! The Prince of the Power of Darkness is become Prince of Light! I throw up the argument. Who am I to stand out against it all?”</p>
<p>A young officer suddenly broke through the undergrowth and faced him.</p>
<p>“Hullo!” exclaimed David. “Not a very hearty welcome!” laughed the other, as he took David’s arm familiarly, and strolled along beside him.</p>
<p>“No—dash you, Bob! I wanted the world to myself!”</p>
<p>“And you have to share it with me—poor devil! Well—have you come out of the sulks yet?”</p>
<p>“It is unlucky to ask questions in these days!”</p
<p>“These days are getting hot, and it’s about time questions were asked of some people! Not but what we had a most satisfactory time in the village today. They came in like lambs, straight from Church, as you might say. The fact is, the Church and the Bible Class leaders and all the pious religious associations are doing heaps better for us than the pubs! Queer rather. One or two of the boys were a bit doubtful, but we urged the ‘die for your country,’ ‘women and children’—‘liberty,’ and that sort of thing, and we hustled the lot!”</p>
<p>“Bunkum!” said David, snappily.</p>
<p>“How dare you! Let me hustle you, old man. You’ll be a sight happier when it’s over.”</p>
<p>“You’ll never hustle me with the ‘die for your country’ touch. If I go, I’ll chuck the bosh. I’ll go to <em>kill</em> for my country—kill hard—kill devilishly and mercilessly, the more the better. I’ll throw bombs for a week standing, and count my dead by the truck load, and then fling down my Star of Honour at the feet of Jesus Christ, as I part with my last gasp!”</p>
<p>“Don’t be an ass!” retorted the other.</p>
<p>“I’m talking simple sense. You know well enough that I never could stand even seeing a terrier kill a rat! But I’m going all right—eyes open. The business is vile, detestable and absolutely stupid; but somehow we are in it, and somebody must do it, so I am going to do it!”</p>
<p>David tore off his cap and smoothed back his hair.</p>
<p>“Look here!” said the other anxiously. “What’s the good of doing the tragic? We have a just cause against a nation of fiends, and everything we have ever prayed for is at stake. None of us wants to see his nation go under!”</p>
<p>“No—none of us wants to see his nation go under!” mused David.</p>
<p>“They began!” said the officer quickly, “and by Hell, we intend to give them what they asked for!”</p>
<p>“Exactly! So I have decided to make one more amongst the millions of unwilling men who have no quarrel against one another, but who are set by their rulers to deal out horrible death, mutilation, and madness. There seems to be no other way!” and David quickened his pace involuntarily.</p>
<p>“My dear chap, we all agree with you. Aren’t we all out against this beastliness? We take up arms to kill war! We hate war quite as much as you—that is,” he added honestly, “of course there is sport in it, hot sport, which appeals to some temperaments. But we were getting a dashed sight too comfortable, and this business has stirred us to life. To see some men, fed up with servants, late to bed, late up, too bored to do anything anybody wanted them to do—now out for any mortal thing—why it’s simply great. There are men in our lot who would once have blushed to be seen with a hair awry, or a tie of yesterday’s pattern, who would wheel a barrow down Club street, or fag away by the week at dull details, and when they get to the front—O David, even you can’t deny it—they are absolutely grand!”</p>
<p>“Yes—yes—it is all grand,” he returned. “Let us go on to the finish by all means. War won’t kill war. It never has, and it never will. But if our country knows no better than to hang on to the apron strings of the Prince of Darkness, in order to win her ideals, well—I’ll hang on too.</p>
<p>“It shan’t be said that I feared going to the Devil, if that is what my country wants of me. But, by Jove, no man shall ever stop me from saying that I understand the direction in which I am going!”</p>
<p>“All right—say what you like, so long as you come along! And look here, let me give you a word of comfort. There’s no need to sear your soul by hating the other fellow, when you fight! If you had deigned to come to Church last night—”</p>
<p>David laughed out hoarsely.</p>
<p>“I quite understand all that! I’ve heard it in Church so often that I’ve stopped going. Lies hurt more in Church than in other places. But I am going into training to learn how to stick my brother through his vitals, blow him up, drive him mad, teach him how to die of thirst without cursing—all out of the love of my unseared soul! He will quite understand, for his Church will have taught him to do the same to me.”</p>
<p>“Oh well—never mind all that,” said the other, trying to be patient, “so long as you turn up trumps, old man! You are just the sort we want—a man with brains and ideas. War is a tremendous job. The more I see into it, the more amazed I am that we can do it at all. Why—are you turning back?”</p>
<p>“Yes, I said I should be out to dinner, but I’ve changed my mind. I think I’ll get all this over with my mother. She will be glad to hear that I am going to fight for my King and country.”</p>
<p>“Ah—” the young officer shook hands painfully with his friend, and they parted.</p>
<p>“My kingdom is not of this world, else would my servants fight,” whispered the Child.</p>
<p>David started, and put his hand to his forehead.</p>
<p>“Who spoke that?”</p>
<p>“I did,” and the Child touched the man’s hand.</p>
<p>“Who are you, beautiful Child?”</p>
<p>“I am a Messenger from Paradise. You are not sure of your weapons. Wait,” he urged.</p>
<p>“Wait, I cannot wait! This thing has to be done, and there is no other way.”</p>
<p>“If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, Who giveth liberally and upbraideth not.”</p>
<p>“I have asked—there is no answer. How can a Child understand?”</p>
<p>“Yet you will take the Message?” he pleaded. “With the weapons of Love—”</p>
<p>“No good! No good, Child. I’m sorry, but—”</p>
<p>David stood suddenly quite still in the path. The Child had gone.</p>
<p>“Failed!” Soft laughter greeted the Child. He turned quickly, and looked into the mocking eyes of a Son of Fear.</p>
<hr />
<p>“No words can say how proud I am of you, my dear boy!” said Lady Forester, as she gripped her son’s hand between her own. “I knew you would do the right thing in the end.”</p>
<p>“Yes, mother,” he said steadily.</p>
<p>“God bless you, David!” “No—I won’t weep—for now that I have given my all, I can endure to live.”</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VII</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Then Jesus called His disciples unto Him and said: I have compassion on the multitude.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>The train was crowded with soldiers, but they made room politely for a grave-eyed woman to seat herself as comfortably as might be.</p>
<p>As for the Child, he stood in the doorway. His eyes were anxious, and his face was shaded with care, for he had been wandering up and down the land for many days and the sorrow and evil he had found was hurting intolerably.</p>
<p>“Thunder take the war!” The soldier in the far corner spoke suddenly, as he carefully smoothed down his leg with a tobacco-stained hand. “They might as well stick me up against the nearest wall, and shoot me and have done with it!”</p>
<p>“Why—what’s wrong?” asked a keen-eyed recruit in a new uniform.</p>
<p>“Wrong!” sneered the other. “Passed to report myself at the Depot for active service, that’s all! They say I can walk!”</p>
<p>“But can you?”</p>
<p>“Oh dear yes! Half-a-mile and a yard or two over! The Colonel would have had a bit of pity, but the doctor—the old tottering fool—takes a pride in clearing us out. Haven’t I had eight months of it? Why can’t they leave some of us chaps alone, and give you beggars your chance—you’re keen enough!”</p>
<p>“You mean you’re fed up with the war?”</p>
<p>“War? Who’s talking about war? I’m an old soldier, and I know what war is! But this ain’t war! This is Imperial slaughter of the people—a wholesale burnt-offering to the Devil! You see, youngster, you haven’t been there. I have! Good Lord! No—we’ll keep His name out of it and say Prince of Darkness! Some of us have seen sights out there that make us afraid to open our eyes, even in this old country. ‘Glorious memories, to keep ’em going for the rest of their lives!’ that was some of the stuff us chaps at the front roared over, when we read it in the paper—written by some big Government man, safe in the homeland!</p>
<p>“Memories! Didn’t I see my own twin brother blown clean out of my sight? Could I find so much as his boots?”</p>
<p>The man stopped, and no one felt inclined to speak.</p>
<p>“My mother,” he went on in a quieter tone, “sends flowers across regular to put on his grave! I tell her there’s folks out there that does such things. I told her he’d died with his hand in mine, and her name on his lips! When she wanted his things, I told her as how the enemy had pinched ’em ! You needn’t to stare so, youngster! This is a lying business from top to bottom, as you’ll find out soon enough, and anyhow—my mother’s worth a lie!”</p>
<p>“How did it strike you that things were really going?” broke in a sunburnt sergeant.</p>
<p>“Going? Well, it’s my opinion, mates,” and he eyed the men who were leaning forward eagerly, “that we can’t get through, and we know it! We are as good as they are, and they are as good as we are! We’re each of us setting our teeth into a file, and whenever doomsday turns up, we shall be there, unless—”</p>
<p>“Unless what?” asked the recruit.</p>
<p>“Oh—nothing!”</p>
<p>“But what are the enemy really like?” persisted the boy.</p>
<p>“Depends!” said the other cautiously. “Most of ’em pretty much the same as we are. We’re none of us exactly lambs out there—but there’s some—well you wouldn’t care to meet ’em on a dark night—nor let your wife meet ’em neither!”</p>
<p>“First time I saw one,” interrupted a big Northerner, “I fairly turned green. He was a little bit of a chap on patrol duty. I came on him sudden, and could have stuck him as clean as a sucking pig. But my blood was cold, and you want a carcase chock full boiling before you can do the thing proper. So I punched him with my boot end to give him a chance.</p>
<p>“Clear out, my lad!” I shouted. And he cleared out, like as if he’d learnt to talk in our village! Then I bethought myself that I was fighting for my country, so I cocked my rifle and got him. He was my first, and when I looked down at him, quivering like a snared rabbit that you’ve knocked on the head, well—but that doesn’t matter!”</p>
<p>“Ah—” broke in a heavy-looking man opposite, “but you can’t be squeamish out there! If you don’t get your man, he’ll take blasted good care to get you!”</p>
<p>“And the enemy are such fiends!” added the recruit, clenching his hands.</p>
<p>“We are all fiends out there!” said the white-faced man with the shield over both his eyes.</p>
<p>“Fiends and angels, mate!” corrected the Corner man. “One minute we’re tearing at one another’s throats, or scheming every devil’s trick to do for them, cursing, yelling, hacking, drinking to keep up the devilry—finishing off the wounded—”</p>
<p>“Oh no!” exclaimed a woman’s voice.</p>
<p>The soldier turned and stared at her.</p>
<p>“And I say ‘yes’ madam!” he answered her defiantly. “Would you have us advance to trench number two, leaving a lot of half-dead fellows in trench number one to shoot us in the back? We all have to do it. It’s war, and there’s no time in war to run risks—besides—you’re a traitor to your own side if you run risks! It’s only on platforms and in leading articles and in lady’s drawing rooms that every nation curses the other for doing what every soldier knows he is bound to do!”</p>
<p>“And sometimes, to kill him, is the last kindness you can do to your enemy!” put in the blind man. “You, lady,” and he turned in the woman’s direction, “don’t know what it means to be a blind soldier—never able to see anything again except war, as long as you live!”</p>
<p>“No,” she said softly. She sat back and bit her lips until the blood came.</p>
<p>“But another time,” went on the Corner man, “we’ll go as soft as children, and risk our lives for some poor chap lying out in the open. I remember there was one of the enemy lying twenty yards from our trench. We could hear him crying and groaning, and shouting queer things in his beastly language; but one of our chaps who knew the lingo, got that nervous all of a sudden, that he shouts out to us, ‘Don’t you hear? He’s calling for his mother! I’m hanged if I can stand it!’</p>
<p>‘Mother be damned!’ said one of the chaps—He meant no offence, but it’s a touchy business out there when you begin to think about your mother. ‘I don’t care!’ shouts the lad—‘I’ve got a mother too! Who’ll come?’</p>
<p>“He leaps up, waving a bit of white stuff, and the chap as had damned his mother, and another were after him like a pistol shot. We dragged the fellow in, and we could hear the enemy shouting something or another. Both of us got a bit upset like, and for the rest of that day and all that night, we none of us fired a shot. We stuck our heads up instead, and had a look at one another. But that isn’t war,” he added bitterly. “It’s ‘against the regulations,’ as the Colonel told us! But sometimes out there there’s a queer sort of a something that comes up inside a man and makes him stick, where he would never have thought of sticking! Our officers generally know them times!”</p>
<p>“The best everyday pluck I saw out there,” said the Northerner, “was at a time when we were cursedly short of water.</p>
<p>“There was a well, raked by the enemy’s snipers, and every morning the Captain asked for volunteers, and every morning regularly a dozen stepped out, and there was never more than six or eight came in!”</p>
<p>“It can’t surely be true, what the papers say, that you all want to go back?” asked the woman.</p>
<p>“Want to go back?” asked the Corner man impressively, as he leaned across his neighbour to stare at her. “Well, madam, there’s some may say they are willing to go back, for swank, and some will say it when they know they’re too far gone to be sent back, and some will say it for sheer pride and duty, but if any man says he <em>wants</em> to go back—he’s a dashed liar!”</p>
<p>“I see—”</p>
<p>The blind man put out his hand involuntarily, as though by his hand he might see her.</p>
<p>“Whoever you are, lady, if you’d ever slept in a hospital ward, and heard what the fellows yell out in their sleep, you’d never ask that!”</p>
<p>“And as for the papers!” struck in the sergeant, as he rose and began to shoulder his belongings, “don’t you never believe nothing you read in newspapers! They are run by the wrong end of the world!”</p>
<p>The train stopped, and with genial wishes of “Good luck!” to them all, he left them.</p>
<p>“He’s off for a course of extra special bayonet and bomb-throwing training!” remarked the Northerner, “to teach the new recruits—bless their innocent little hearts!”</p>
<p>The company dropped to silence, and only the sound of the hurrying train could be heard. The Child watching, knew that another unseen passenger had pushed his way in amongst the group.</p>
<p>“I wonder when the bell will ring?” remarked the Corner man meditatively. He was staring out towards a village nestling round an ivy-grown Church.</p>
<p>“What bell?” asked the recruit.</p>
<p>“The Peace bell, you fool! When are they going to ring it?”</p>
<p>The grave-eyed woman leaned forward.</p>
<p>“Whom do you mean by ‘they’?”</p>
<p>“God knows!” he returned with reverence.</p>
<p>“There’s not a man amongst them that has the pluck to give the first pull!” sneered the Northerner.</p>
<p>“It’s the papers!” said the blind man restlessly. “If every newspaper with its lying news and its ‘Go-with-the-swim’ editor could be chucked into the Dead Sea, there might be some chance of common sense getting a look in. It’s nothing but the papers that keeps the devilry going!”</p>
<p>“And the old men, terrified out of their wits in case the boys should stop thinking it worth while to die for their money-bags,” put in the Corner man.</p>
<p>“Oh no!” challenged the recruit. “We are going out to die for the women and the children!”</p>
<p>“Are you?” and the Corner man winked at the rough, heavy looking man opposite him.</p>
<p>“And how about the <em>Christians</em>—in all nations, who call us lot ‘the scourge in the hand of God to chastise their enemies!’” suggested the Northerner.</p>
<p>“The queerest part of the whole business!” laughed the Corner man. “I’ll never say that war, as war, is wrong. It’s been my trade ever since I ran away from my mother; but it only needs a blind man to see—no offence, mate—that if these <em>Christians</em> had jumped clean out of their skins with horror when this war started, they could have stopped the whole bang business, and stood a better chance of getting things set straight than ever we soldiers could do! For I ask you—what have we set straight?”</p>
<p>“Oh—why didn’t they?” groaned the woman.</p>
<p>“Because—well, I’m not inside a parson, and don’t fancy the situation, but you see, we army men, we believe in our job, and when the chance comes, we’re there! But the parsons, they don’t down at the bottom, really believe in their job, and when their chance comes, they’re <em>not</em> there! As I said to an old Sunday School teacher of mine, who was boasting of the number of youngsters he’d got to join: ‘Look here, you’re a grand old man, and have done many a good turn to me when I was a young scamp, but don’t you go Sunday-School teaching no more. It doesn’t somehow go down to hear a man sing at the top of his voice:—</p>
<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
 <p><span>Sufficient is Thine arm alone</span><br />
 <span>And our defence is sure.</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>and know that all the time he is saying in his inside, ‘But we should be dished if we hadn’t our army and our navy’! If I set up for believing in an Almighty God, I wouldn’t insult Him like that!”</p>
<p>“If only our Nation could invent some new force—press a button—and clear the other lot off the face of the earth!” laughed the heavy-featured man.</p>
<p>“The other chaps would only get hold of it, and do the same for us!” chaffed the Northerner.</p>
<p>“And suppose we could invent the power—would we use it?” asked the recruit.</p>
<p>“Why, of course, the quicker the better! Anything to stop the dashed business!” said the Northerner.</p>
<p>“Something of that sort is going to be the only way, I do believe!” said the Corner man thoughtfully.</p>
<p>“Oh—but it can’t be!” exclaimed the woman, more to herself than to her companions.</p>
<p><em>“No—there is one other way, if any nation has the courage to take it!”</em> said the Child, revealing himself to them.</p>
<p>“Why—who are you?” exclaimed the recruit.</p>
<p>“I am a Messenger from Paradise!” said the Child. “I have come to give you a Message from your Father. There is but one way out—the highest, the noblest—worth dying for a thousand times—for it is the only way which will bring about the salvation of the world!”</p>
<p>“And what is that way?” asked the Corner man breathlessly. He had laid down his pipe and pulled off his cap.</p>
<p><em>“Take up the Last Weapon of Fearless Love. Lay down your arms, for they are cursed, for they belong, not to God, but to the Prince of Fear!”</em></p>
<p>The Child was gone, and the men stared at one another.</p>
<p>“I saw him!” exclaimed the blind man.</p>
<p>“God have mercy on us!” breathed the others.</p>
<p>“Let us pray!” said the woman.</p>
<p>And every head was bowed.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Woe to the rebellious children, said the Lord, that take counsel, but not of Me: and that cover with a covering, but not of My spirit, that they may add sin to sin: that walk to go down into Egypt, and have not asked at My mouth: to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of Egypt.</p><p>Therefore shall the strength of Egypt be your shame and the trust in the shadow of Egypt your confusion.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>Sir Joshua gathered his papers together, laid them in accurate order, and then swinging round his desk chair, he lighted a cigar.</p>
<p>In a few moments, the small private conference he had invited would assemble, and he would know exactly where he was.</p>
<p>He looked round the well-furnished study with complacency, for it was in this Great City house, that he had thought out so much that had made him great.</p>
<p>Sir Joshua Power was, as he himself knew, one of the most influential men of his day. He had but to express the wish, and Court, Church, Palace, City Office, Castle, or Popular Platform was open to him. Though not officially connected with the Government, he was unofficially within its most intimate counsels, and in this supreme hour of his country’s peril he held the last word of wisdom on behalf of its harassed rulers.</p>
<p>For war was Sir Joshua’s specialty. For a quarter of a century he had felt the pulse of the world, and had quickened or calmed its fever, as he chose. Sir Joshua possessed a giant mind and a giant outlook, and he understood accurately that in the self-seeking fear of nations, he possessed his most reliable asset for the great business concerns with which he was connected.</p>
<p>In his personal relations he was kind-hearted and generous, and his great wealth was unstintingly used for the philanthropic schemes to which his wife was devoted, but in his profession, Sir Joshua was an enthusiast, and he was now living through his supreme hour of triumphant opportunity.</p>
<p>National fears had forced down all barriers and the storm had come. Having through his immense international enterprises, armed friend and foe alike, it was necessary that he should now judiciously concentrate himself on the welfare of his own country, and he had consequently become the idol of a people recklessly pouring its wealth and its poverty down at his feet.</p>
<p>True, mutterings and grumblings of discontent rose spasmodically to the surface, but in fierce times of terror it is not safe to allow mutiny against the one power that can save.</p>
<p>Nevertheless, Sir Joshua had felt for some time a sense of dissatisfaction, that through his very successes in the past, he was unable to lead his country on to a more decisive victory.</p>
<p>A new question, vital beyond dreams was now facing him, and for the first time in his experience he was troubled with a certain doubt as to whether his country would follow him.</p>
<p>Would they brand him as a devil, or lift him on high as the saviour of his race, like his gallant namesake of old?</p>
<p>That his country should have any real doubt as to the proposal he was about to make, would be merely stupid; but it had to be remembered that Dame Prejudice has an awkward way with her at times.</p>
<p>Sir Joshua turned suddenly in his chair and glanced behind him. Then he swung round and peered into a far corner of the room. For a moment he had an uncomfortable impression that he was not alone.</p>
<p>But he neither saw the Child standing under the portrait of the greatest General the world had ever known; nor one of the Sons of Fear, who had taken his place so near him that he might have felt his breath upon his cheek.</p>
<p>The door opened and a visitor was announced.</p>
<p>“Ah—come in, my lord!” exclaimed Sir Joshua genially, as he rose and grasped the hand of one of the most prominent Rulers of the Great Church, and led him to a chair of honor.</p>
<p>“I am afraid I am rather before my time!” apologised the Ruler, “and to interrupt a busy man like yourself, Sir Joshua, is a crime!”</p>
<p>“We are all busy men!” returned Sir Joshua cordially, “and, frankly, I am delighted to have the chance of a word with you, Ruler, before the others come in.”</p>
<p>The Church Ruler inclined his head and then gave a sigh.</p>
<p>“These are dark times indeed, when everything we hold dear is trembling in an awful balance!”</p>
<p>“Exactly!” admitted Sir Joshua deferentially. “But in the first place, allow me to tell you, Ruler, how immensely I was struck with your grand appeal to the Nation last night.”</p>
<p>“You were there?” asked the other with a startled gratification.</p>
<p>Sir Joshua smiled.</p>
<p>“Yes, I took special care to be present. I wished to hear what line you would take, and I may tell you that I was completely satisfied. Such a message from a man in your responsible position is worth—well—everything that is necessary to inspire a great Empire to the noblest effort of which it is capable.”</p>
<p>“I did but speak as I felt called to speak,” said the Ruler modestly.</p>
<p>“Therein lies the power of the message. If I remember right, you urged that if any of us fail in this awful hour to give our uttermost support to the God of Battles, we deserve to be ranked as traitors to the Highest, and worthy of the scorn and contempt of mankind.”</p>
<p>“That is indeed my sincere opinion,” said the Ruler earnestly, “because all for which we in the Great Church have ever hoped and prayed is at stake!”</p>
<p>“Our armies and navies have worked wonders!” said Sir Joshua musingly. “And monthby month, through the good providence of the Almighty, we have managed to keep ahead in the use of every invention of force which offers predominance. Whatever new power has been revealed to us, whether of force or strategy, we have accepted with gratitude, and painstakingly developed it on behalf of Almighty God and our beloved country. That, Ruler, you will admit is the only logical outcome of the position we have taken up?”</p>
<p>“Yes—yes,” said the Ruler, a little puzzled. “You mean that we must keep up to date at all costs, or we are lost?”</p>
<p>“Exactly! Of course I gather from what you have both written and preached that you take this view, and that is why I ’phoned you to join a small private conclave. You will—Ah—I hear the others coming—but what I have said will suggest to you the line you will naturally take, when I make myself clearer.”</p>
<p>The door opened and four other visitors were announced.</p>
<p>The Duchess of Moorland, the wealthiest woman in the Empire, keen, alert, patriotic, domineering, and possessing a charming personality and great social influence, entered first.</p>
<p>Behind her followed a pale fair-haired man with keen eyes, and a low forehead. He was evidently a foreigner and possibly shy, and Sir Joshua introduced him with curious respect, as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rotensen, a friend from Neutralia.</p>
<p>The third was a stout, self opinionated little man. He rubbed his hands together as he entered the room, and Sir Joshua welcomed him deferentially, for the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Theobald Rogers had influence amongst hundreds of thousands of the professed Followers of the Christ God, who had broken away from the Great Church. Sir Joshua could not afford to neglect the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Theobald Rogers.</p>
<p>Sir Joshua had a way of setting quite incongruous people at their ease, and for a minute or two the little company broke into pleasant chat.</p>
<p>Then Michael Forward, proprietor and editor of one of the leading newspapers, was announced, and close on his heels came John Dissart, perhaps the busiest and most practical member of the King’s Government.</p>
<p>“Our little company is now complete,” said Sir Joshua, “and we had better get to business; but before calling upon my friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rotensen to make his statement, I should like to offer one or two explanations.</p>
<p>“This gathering is, as you will understand, absolutely confidential, and I cannot thank you all enough for honoring me in such a consultation, for I believe I may venture to say, that upon the decision we now come to, the fate of our beloved country may depend.</p>
<p>“Briefly then, we have arrived, as we are all aware, at a position in this war, when any sudden accession of power to one side or the other, would mean a victory, and probably a crushing victory for the fortunate possessors of that power.</p>
<p>“Our own country has not always been sufficiently keen to avail herself of possible new forces, owing to—well—we need not go into that sore subject—and he smiled reassuringly.</p>
<p>“I have myself known for some time that there was a world-force latent, which would, if we could only arrive at it, turn everything we call arms and munitions to waste paper. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rotensen, an honored citizen of Neutralia, has now proved to me conclusively, that I am too late in my experiments, and that I have been working on wrong lines. This new force is now without doubt discovered, and he has made it his duty to come over to our country to place the matter before me, that I may secure it for our Government, arrange terms, and in the final event, explain the project to the People and put the discovery to the supreme test.</p>
<p>“That is the object of our conference, and you will readily see that whichever nation secures the exploitation of this new force, must have the whole world, civilised and uncivilised, at its feet. And more than that—I understand that within a few weeks—days I might almost say, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rotensen?—of our getting to work, this war with all its horrors will be over. As for the price—”</p>
<p>“The price would be neither here nor there, surely?” said the Duchess with eager impatience. “You know, Sir Joshua, that our country is prepared to pay any price to defeat the enemy, and rescue our people—our women and children out of their bloodthirsty hands!”</p>
<p>“In money—yes—Duchess!” admitted Sir Joshua, “but we must also have the nation’s moral support. That is why I have felt it desirable to gather this precise company together; for we should be helpless without the support of the Great Church, the other powerful religious bodies, the Press, the world of fashion and—I need hardly add—His Majesty’s Government!”</p>
<p>John Dissart bowed gravely. It had been at his suggestion that the others had been called.</p>
<p>“With such unanimous backing,” Sir Joshua continued, “this new force could be rushed upon the country and popularised without—well frankly—it is of such a nature that though its use is merely the logical outcome of the great principles upon which our Empire rests, one fears lest some sections of the public—and we can easily guess of whom they would consist—might cause serious trouble and prejudice, if not ruin the effort we are about to make for the salvation of our country and the whole civilised world. But <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rotensen had better explain the matter himself.”</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IX</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou, not. If they say: Come with us, let us lay in wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause, let us swallow them alive as the grave, and whole as those that go down into the pit. My son, walk not thou in the ways with them, for their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed blood.</p>
<p>They lay in wait for their own blood; they lurk privily for their own lives.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rotensen rose, gave a stiff bow, and drew out a single sheet of paper for reference.</p>
<p>“My invention, or discovery, madam and gentlemen, is very simple. I have named it Hellite. It travels swift as lightning—distance is of no consequence.</p>
<p>“Set free in any direction, it disperses itself through the air and blasts everything within its range—which can be made practically limitless. It can as easily destroy ships, armies, fortifications, cities, as the whole vegetation of a country.</p>
<p>“Nothing is secure from its effects, for it can tear apart the very bowels of the earth, should the enemy hide there.</p>
<p>“If Sir Joshua elects to deal with me and secures for his country the monopoly of my discovery, you will end the war in—perhaps a week or even one day—I know not! Or the very threat of the use of Hellite may be sufficient. You have proclaimed in your nation that there can be no peace until you have crushed the enemy, and demolished his military power for ever. I am here to offer you the greatest Peace-making power the world has ever known. Armies, navies, armament works, battalions of human flesh and blood will disappear from off the face of the earth. Present and future enemies must bite the dust and take any terms you choose to offer, as to territory, commerce, and liberty, or else deliberately submit themselves to annihilation.”</p>
<p>The man sat down and closed his lips firmly.</p>
<p>Sir Joshua glanced at his guests and remained silent.</p>
<p>“Is this proved?” asked John Dissart—knowing his answer.</p>
<p>“I should, of course, before the terms were finally settled, wish to have the pleasure of proving my case,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rotensen quietly. “I have had some long technical conversations with Sir Joshua, and I understand he is satisfied.”</p>
<p>“I have certainly gone into the matter very closely with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rotensen,” said Sir Joshua, “and though he has not actually revealed to me the secret, I am convinced that he has got there, and I am prepared to sacrifice everything on behalf of this Last Weapon.”</p>
<p>“Sir Joshua may be trusted to know what he is doing!” put in Michael Forward. “He has never yet been known to let his shareholders through.”</p>
<p>“And this stuff—” began the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Theobald Rogers—</p>
<p>“Power, sir!” corrected <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rotensen, “as electricity is power.”</p>
<p>“I beg your pardon! Power then. Can it be generated easily? Is it costly?”</p>
<p>“Enough to destroy an entire nation could be produced at the cost of a single battleship.”</p>
<p>“Where will the armament firms come in then?” struck in Michael Forward jocosely.</p>
<p>“I trust that I have never put my own advantage before that of my country!” said Joshua severely. “Besides—it would naturally pay any nation to buy out every armament firm within its borders, to gain such absolute security at such absurd cost.”</p>
<p>“Yes—I can see that!” mused the Duchess.</p>
<p>“And—may I ask—does this Hellite hurt?” asked the Ruler of the Great Church. He looked flushed and anxious.</p>
<p>Sir Joshua nodded towards <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rotensen to answer the question.</p>
<p>“Hurt?” he said, knitting his brows, and lifting his shoulders. “But what would you, my lord. Do not all your arms hurt? Are they not planned to hurt? No—perhaps I am wrong. They are planned to kill—as many as possible. All the countries at war are now calculating how many men they can kill every week, and how long they will be able to offer the great flesh target. But the beauty of Hellite is that it kills as lightning kills—painless—perfectly satisfactory. We say farewell to horrible trenches, mutilations, savage and demoralising onslaughts, murderous bombs, mines, and the rest. It only needs that your airmen should go up—up over the enemy’s fleet, his arsenals, his armies, his country, and everything is blasted as the lightning blasts. You can even project Hellite from your guns over an ocean width, and once set going, it—what shall I say—it goes! No, my lord, I can assure you that Hellite does not hurt. It is too swift to hurt. Indeed, I have called it the ‘Radiant pathway to the Unseen!’”</p>
<p>“But—” objected the Ruler, looking round him deprecatingly, “I am not quite sure whether the Great Church would feel able to support such a terrible means of destruction as Hellite seems to involve.”</p>
<p>“Why not?” struck in Michael Forward. “Are you not, my lord, already supporting a score of hideous devices for doing men to death? Do you not bless battleships, and invest the money you earn in the service of the Prince of Peace in their manufacture, that we may have as many as possible? Are you not urging your communicants to train themselves in the use of those nice little toys, the bayonet and the bomb? Are you not preaching in your churches that force of arms is the only way to bring in your Master’s Kingdom? Then—surely the quicker and the more effective the method, the better—naturally.”</p>
<p>“Ah well,” groaned the Duchess, “it certainly couldn’t be worse than what is going on now. Our shells are perfectly awful, and when our poor boys get hit in the stomach, or the spine, no words can say what they suffer—then the noise—deafening—breaking their ear drums and blinding them with the concussion—and of course these bayonet charges are certainly rather brutalising to all concerned, and if this new force could really shorten things—don’t you think, my dear Ruler, that we should be justified—?”</p>
<p>“Yes—yes, perhaps so. At the same time there are certain recognised rules of humanity which we, as a nation have learned to acknowledge, and I should be sorry for us to descend in the moral scale.” The Ruler felt he was ending lamely.</p>
<p>Sir Joshua leaned forward, that he might brace himself to the task he had expected would face him. He must have the Church behind him, or the scheme broke in his hands.</p>
<p>“Shall we look at all this quite dispassionately,” he said with forceful authority. “I was deeply interested in a remark you made last night, Ruler, or rather in that little piece of personal experience with which you honored us. You explained that at one time you had advocated reduction in the means of force as a royal road to the blessing of Peace; but that you had learnt that if force is to be used at all, it is the duty of every nation to see to it that she possesses the preponderating measure.</p>
<p>“Now far be it from me to wish to persuade any man against the dictates of his conscience. I only wish to show that the case for the use of Hellite is practically universally admitted. We are merely at last in a position to face the logical conclusion to which our theories have brought us. And certainly, Ruler, I feel with you, that we should be guilty of turning traitor to the God of Battles if, at this hour, when we have deliberately put our Nation to the hazard of war, we were to refuse to use His lightning shafts of victory.</p>
<p>“We have, perhaps, marvelled that He has not intervened more pronouncedly on our side, seeing that our cause is the cause of righteousness and civilisation, but that has not been, so far, His holy will—indeed I confess it has sometimes appeared to me that the Almighty must be neutral—but this quite providential offer from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rotensen has cleared the view. We are agreed that war is horrible, hellish if you like, but that when once an enemy has plunged us into war, there is nothing for it but for us to defend ourselves and our friends by the most practical and scientific use of war methods. Now I put it to you all—do you or do you not believe that the future fate of the world rests upon the result of this war?”</p>
<p>“Oh—of course—of course!” came in a general murmur.</p>
<p>“Then dare we deliberately cast this Last Weapon from us, or shall we raise it on high in the Name of Almighty God, so that Peace and Righteousness may reign throughout the world?”</p>
<p>Sir Joshua flung himself back. But the battle was not yet won.</p>
<p>“But—a—what about the women and children?” asked the Duchess. “I don’t want to be contentious, but I suppose they would have to be very careful, or quite terrible things might happen?”</p>
<p>“Terrible things must always happen to women and children wherever war rages,” said Sir Joshua. “That is in human nature. The blood lust is aroused and control is lost. Still—we have always to face certain difficulties in the use of any method or weapon. As you know, for instance, excellent news is coming in as to our success in driving our enemy to his knees through our gradual starvation of the civil population. Starvation is, I think we shall all admit, slow Hell—Hellite is quick Hell—that is the only intrinsic difference.”</p>
<p>“Frankly,” said the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Theobald Rogers, “I fear that some of our people may give trouble unless the matter is put to them with the greatest skill. And yet,” he smiled blandly, “I have feared before, and it is wonderful how very sensibly the bulk of the members and ministers of our Churches have taken this war. Our country stands first—at whatever cost, thank God.”</p>
<p>“There is no question but that we must take Hellite up, and at once, if Sir Joshua is satisfied,” said Michael Forward. “I will guarantee that there will be no trouble worth considering, especially if the full implication of the force at our disposal is not completely understood until—well until after the event!”</p>
<p>The Child slipped forward and stood beside the Ruler, and swiftly the Son of Fear went to the other side.</p>
<p>“I don’t know!” he said anxiously. “I fear—I mean I really don’t see how we can think of such a thing!”</p>
<p>“But suppose we do not use this Last Weapon, my dear Ruler, what do you suppose will happen?” asked John Dissart slowly, as though he had not yet made up his mind.</p>
<p>“Well I suppose—” he looked at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rotensen doubtfully. “I have come here first,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rotensen, “because I should prefer to throw the advantage of my discovery into your scale; but of course business is business, and should I fail to get support here, I shall be obliged to make my offer to your enemy. It did strike me,” and he smiled curiously, “as to whether you would have any doubts, but I fancy your enemy would have none!”</p>
<p>The Son of Fear smiled triumphantly at the Child, as he left the Ruler’s side and whispered in the Duchess’s ear.</p>
<p>“Good heavens!” she exclaimed. “You mean that the Enemy could set this Hellite going, to devastate our land and murder every man, woman and child in a single night?”</p>
<p>“That is practically so,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rotensen coolly. “If once Hellite is set going, nothing can stop it—nothing can protect from it. As I have said, it is the Last Weapon.”</p>
<p>“Then of course we dare not let it go to the enemy!” admitted the Duchess. “Why it might mean—well anything!”</p>
<p>“Exactly, madam,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rotensen.</p>
<p>“Of course,” said the Ruler, arguing furiously with himself, “it would certainly be safer for us to secure the monopoly of such a force, because we could always be trusted to use it with discretion.”</p>
<p>“An excellent argument, Ruler,” struck in John Dissart. “Possessed of this power at our back, we could speak with authority as to peace and friendship between nations! If all the world realised that we and our friend Neutralia possessed the Last Weapon—the greatest force known under Heaven—we should rule the world according to the great ideals bestowed upon us by the Almighty.”</p>
<p>“Yet there remains a greater force than Hellite, and you know it!” whispered the Child to the Ruler, as he moved in front of him and looked up into his eyes.</p>
<p>The Ruler turned deadly pale and grasped the sides of his chair.</p>
<p>“Why, Child?” he breathed, somehow aware that the Vision was to himself alone.</p>
<p>“Why hast thou cast away thy Master’s sword and taken up the weapons of Fear?” demanded the Child with flashing eyes.</p>
<p>“Who art thou?” pleaded the Ruler. “I am a Messenger from thy Master, sent to tear aside the delusions of the Prince of Fear. Look up, and see the end to which thou art leading the flock of God!”</p>
<p>The Ruler tried to open his lips, but he was dumb in the presence of the Child.</p>
<p>“Is it not written: ‘Not by might nor by power, but by my spirit, saith the Lord?’ Where hast thou mislaid the sword of the spirit, that thou darest to raise the lightning shafts forged by the Prince of Fear and Darkness, that thou mayest fling them at the brothers and sisters of the Christ God, whom thou callest the enemy?”</p>
<p>Again the Ruler sat tongue tied.</p>
<p>“The sheep verily perish, because their shepherds have fled. Hast thou no faith to break the power of the enemy as He broke it? By Love alone shall Peace rule the world, for Love is the Last Weapon! Yet thou fliest from its use, as from some traitorous plague. Hellite or Love. Which wilt thou offer to thy people?”</p>
<p>The Ruler staggered up from his chair and fell upon his knees.</p>
<p>“My dear Ruler, you are ill!” exclaimed Sir Joshua. “Allow me—”</p>
<p>“Thank you! Thank you!” He put his hand to his head. “Yes—I fear I must have had a slight turn. If you would be good enough to call a taxi—”</p>
<p>The taxi was called and the Ruler left the conference.</p>
<p>“I fear we may have trouble in that quarter,” said Sir Joshua as he returned from seeing the Ruler off.</p>
<p>“I think not,” said John Dissart. “The Great Church has never gone against the State in any national matter, and she will see at once that any disloyalty to the use of this world-force would be treachery of the deepest dye.”</p>
<p>“And you really think that if we took up Hellite, we could get this war ended in a month, and settle down again to peace and prosperity?” asked the Duchess.</p>
<p>“There is no reason whatever against it,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rotensen with a polite bow.</p>
<p>“The great thing,” said Sir Joshua, “for us to do now, is to keep the secret absolutely, and yet at the same time to accustom the people’s minds to the idea that some greater force is needed than we possess at present. We can all help in our own way.”</p>
<p>“Yes—yes”—the murmur of agreement was general.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">X</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>He gave His people over unto the sword, and was wroth with His inheritance. The fire consumed their young men, and their maidens were not given in marriage.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>Dorothy walked across the lawn. The tennis poles leaned towards each other disconsolately, reaching out for the net which was not there, and the daisies twinkled triumphantly through the heavy grass.</p>
<p>But the state of the lawn did not really matter.</p>
<p>The girl passed into the shrubbery. The weeds flourished amidst the luxurious wilderness of herbaceous colouring.</p>
<p>She walked slowly, and a perky terrier trotted soberly by her side.</p>
<p>“I might weed,” she thought, then shook her head. “Weeding doesn’t matter either!”</p>
<p>Presently she reached the old garden-house. She pulled open the door with a jerk. The place smelt musty.</p>
<p>Some warped tennis rackets leaned against the wall. A dirty ball had rolled away from its companions in the broken cardboard box. The terrier sniffed the ball and looked up expectantly, for an old ball was surely his perquisite.</p>
<p>But Dorothy shook her head.</p>
<p>A faded college cap was lying on a canvas chair. Some snapshots, damped and curled, lay on the dusty table.</p>
<p>She pulled the snapshots straight, and looked at them one by one. There were small groups, big groups, pictures of laughter, fun, and youth-time nonsense. Dorothy did not smile, but laid them down reverently, where she had found them.</p>
<p>“Come Gip!” she said peremptorily, and the terrier left the ball and followed her.</p>
<p>On her way back to the house, she passed through the stable yard. She knew what she must see, and yet she unbolted the stable door. Only the old familiar scent greeted her. What she missed was the eager drawing of the chains.</p>
<p>The dog sprang at a startled mouse, which escaped behind the corn bin.</p>
<p>“Come Gip!” she said once more.</p>
<hr />
<p>The evening was closing in as she wandered into the drawing room—the “Glory room,” as they used to call it, when the western sun was shining.</p>
<p>She threw open the piano, and leaning over towards the music cabinet, she pulled out an old song book, opened it at random, and began to play softly. She did not sing. Why should she, when the tune was enough?</p>
<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song"><p>
<span>Oft in the stilly night,</span><br />
<span class="i1">Ere slumber’s chain has bound me,</span><br />
<span>Fond memory brings the light</span><br />
<span class="i1">Of other days around me.</span><br />
<span>The smiles, the tears of boyhood’s years,</span><br />
<span class="i1">The words of love then spoken,</span><br />
<span>The eyes that shone, now dimmed and gone,</span><br />
<span class="i1">The cheerful hearts now broken.</span>
</p><p>
<span>When I remember all</span><br />
<span class="i1">The friends so linked together,</span><br />
<span>I’ve seen around me fall</span><br />
<span class="i1">Like leaves in wintry weather,</span><br />
<span>I feel like one who treads alone</span><br />
<span class="i1">Some banquet hell deserted,</span><br />
<span>Whose lights are fled, whose garlands dead,</span><br />
<span class="i1">And all but he departed—</span>
</p></blockquote>
<p>Tears welled up into her eyes, and she brushed them away violently.</p>
<p>“What nonsense to play a sentimental thing like that!” So Dorothy mocked at herself. “Let me find something cheerful!” and she turned back the pages.</p>
<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song"><p>
<span>Forty years on when afar and asunder</span><br />
<span class="l1">Parted are those who are singing today.</span><br />
<span>When you look back and regretfully wonder</span><br />
<span class="l1">What you were like in your work and your play.</span><br />
<span>Then it may be there will often come o’er you</span><br />
<span class="l1">Glimpses of notes, like the catch of a song.</span><br />
<span>Visions of boyhood shall float them before you,</span><br />
<span class="l1">Echoes of dreamland shall bear them along!</span>
</p><p>
<span>Follow up! Follow up! Follow up! Follow up! Follow up!</span><br />
<span>Till the field ring again and again,</span><br />
<span>With the tramp of the twenty-two men!</span><br />
<span class="l2">Follow up! Follow up!</span>
</p></blockquote>
<p>Louder and louder and yet louder the girl played, until finishing with a stumbling crash, she leaned her head down on the piano and burst into a passion of tears.</p>
<p>The door opened.</p>
<p>“Oh—beg pardon, Miss Dorothy!” said the maid.</p>
<p>“What is it Margery?”</p>
<p>“Only Nellie Loveday from the village has called. She heard you were home, Miss Dorothy—but I will tell her to come another time.”</p>
<p>“No—no !” said the girl quickly. “Let her come in!”</p>
<p>In a few moments, a dark-eyed girl came shyly into the room to seek some comfort from her late Sunday School teacher.</p>
<p>Dorothy put out her hand and smiled a sad welcome. “That’s right, Nellie, come in!”</p>
<p>Nellie glanced into her young teacher’s face. Disguise was impossible.</p>
<p>“Oh Miss Dorothy! The boys have all gone!”</p>
<p>Dorothy put her arm about the heart-broken village girl and having kissed her, she drew her gently to a seat.</p>
<hr />
<p>It was later in the evening that, as Dorothy’s mother wished her good-night, she said yearningly:</p>
<p>“Dearest, it is nice to think that you are able to get this little holiday. You will really try to rest yourself as much as possible, won’t you?”</p>
<p>The girl kissed her mother without replying. Then she went to the window, and drawing aside the blind, she looked out into the moonlight.</p>
<p>All was very still; but Dorothy did not see the dim shrubs, nor the outlines of the distant trees.</p>
<p>“Mother! What does the Moon see tonight?” She turned and faced her mother passionately.</p>
<p>“My darling—”</p>
<p>“It’s no use, mother! I can’t bear it! I must get back to hospital tomorrow. It is awful there, but here—”</p>
<p>Her mother rose and put her arm about her daughter.</p>
<p>“My darling—I know what it is here!”</p>
<p>“I’m sorry mother! Come and kiss me when I’m in bed!” and Dorothy broke away.</p>
<hr />
<p>The Child went out under the Moonlight and stood there with trembling mouth and bedimmed eyes.</p>
<p>He was startled as a cold hand was laid upon his shoulder.</p>
<p>“Beautiful Messenger from Heaven, you cannot rob us of our harvest of tears!” mocked a dark-visaged Son of Fear, as he glided away.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 epub:type="title">
        Part <span epub type="z3998:roman">III</span>
</h2>
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XI</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Behold, the Lord’s hand is not shortened that it cannot save; neither His ear heavy that it cannot hear; but your iniquities have separated between you and your God.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood; their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity; wasting and destruction are in their paths.</p>
<p>The way of peace they know not; and there is no judgment in their goings; they have made them crooked paths; whosoever goeth therein shall not know peace.</p>
<p>Therefore is judgment afar from us, neither doth justice overtake us; we wait for light, but behold obscurity, for brightness, but we walk in darkness.</p>
<p>We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as if we had no eyes. We stumble at noonday as in the night; we are in desolate places as dead men.</p>
<p>We roar all like bears, and mourn sore like doves; we look for salvation, but it is far off from us.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>From east to west the Child wandered, seeing all that the Rulers of the peoples commanded should be done in the name of liberty and righteousness and self-defence.</p>
<p>Wherever he went, he marvelled at the skill with which the Sons of Fear persuaded men to their own undoing and drove their victims to acts—fierce, bloody, ruthless, dishonorable.</p>
<p><em>The necessity to win</em> was the battle-cry which men shouted in order to nerve themselves to deeds they so often hated.</p>
<p>And everywhere he found men and women with brave hearts, emptying themselves of all they held most dear, that they might staunch the wounds of the world. Yet the wounds grew and grew beyond their power of staunching, and a great despair gripped their souls even as they toiled. And the Child found women in all lands, holding out imploring hands to one another, seeking if it might be, to bridge the horror, and everywhere he found that the path of the men and women of peace was made more difficult because the Sons of Fear dogged their footsteps and stirred up the great ones of the earth—aye and some of the poorest—to crush them to silence.</p>
<p>But everywhere an undercurrent of misery, anger, blighted idealism, simple humanity, rolled beneath the surface, gathering strength for its hour.</p>
<p>And the Child, knowing already the evil that moves men to pursue their brothers for their own advantage, even in the times called peace, was not surprised to learn that in every country there were those who steadily throttled the people in their agony, and blessed the whole occasion as a means to their own aggrandisement and the domination of their class; for the Prince of Fear knew exactly where to deal out his honors and his riches in order to gain his ends, and where to throw his refuse of ruin.</p>
<hr />
<p>The enemy had broken through the lines—dead and dying lay behind them, and the terrified villagers fled into their homes, waiting—waiting.</p>
<p>A man clutched at his rifle, a woman hid a knife within her dress, or roused the fire to a roar, so that she might at least have boiling water wherewith to defend herself.</p>
<p>And the wild troops, sent forth whether they willed it or no, mad with the lust of battle, with reeking clothes and hands red with their brothers’ blood, swarmed into the village, to drink, to demand, to curse. Women flying before them were caught in their arms. Old men, seeking to protect, were clubbed to death before the eyes of the terrified children.</p>
<p>Shells crashed into the church. Why not? The Christ God was betrayed—His Name was taken in vain. It was no longer necessary that His house should stand. Let it also go down amidst the ruins.</p>
<p>The soldiery were called away to other work. The village was left, looted, shattered and horror-stricken.</p>
<p>A few women crept out of their hiding places fearfully, to stare at one another. They whispered together with bated breath. Plans must be made. It was necessary to bury the dead and comfort the little children.</p>
<p>There were other women, who hid themselves in an anguish too horrible for tears.</p>
<p>And at night, the other army rushed through the village, and learning of all that had happened, the soldiers dashed forward, thirsting for revenge. The spirit of the tiger was in their blood, and the weapons of Fear were in their hands.</p>
<p>And without mercy they fought, and without mercy they won, and flesh and blood sank down before their fearful onslaught.</p>
<p>Yet behold, the enemy heard of the slaughter of their comrades, and were roused in their turn once more to fight—fight—fight. It was the only way.</p><p>“Through again!” said a boy with a wild laugh, as he flung himself down wearily. He was coated with mud and stained with blood. “My luck as usual! Not a scratch!”</p><p>“Do you know any reason why this sort of work should not go on for ever?” remarked his companion, as he unwound his puttee. “Ach!” It had stuck in a nasty flesh wound.</p><p>“Want a hand?” asked the other.</p><p>“Thanks—a beastly scratch—but it was his last! I got him in the throat beautifully!”</p><p>“You see—” moralised the boy, as he did first aid with quick skill, “I believe you’re right. It must go on for ever unless we can find some other weapon! Something to decide it! Something that will put one of us on top without any manner of doubt!”</p><p>“We’re stuck here, anyway!” said the other grumpily, for his wound was smarting badly.</p><p>“I say—that’s dashed impudence!” exclaimed the boy.</p><p>“Why what?”</p><p>“Over there!”</p><p>The enemy’s trench was not two hundred yards away. A board had shot up into view, and on it was written the words:</p><p>“You are fools!”</p><p>“Shall we pot at it?” cried the boy.</p><p>“Not worth ammunition!” said a sergeant. “Besides—it’s dashed true!”</p><p>But the board had disappeared. It came up again, and they read:</p><p>“We are fools!”</p><p>“That’s more to the point than the other!” remarked the sergeant.</p><p>“Some chap enjoying himself !” laughed the boy. “It’s gone—I wonder what next!”</p><p>The board came up again, and on it was written:</p><p>“Why not all go home?”</p><p>The boy didn’t laugh. To his disgust, he knew his eyes were full of tears.</p><p>“Dash it!” he muttered. He looked shame-facedly towards the sergeant. But the sergeant looked away towards the setting sun which was filling the heavens with a wild glory.</p><p>“Well—why not go home?” asked the wounded man.</p><p>And the Child, coming up to them, said quietly:</p><p>“Yes—why don’t you all go home—it is the only way.”</p><p>“Why Child! How came you here?” cried the boy.</p><p>But the Child had turned his face, and they watched him pass across the firing line and disappear over into the enemy’s trench.</p><p>“Good Lord! Did you see that, Sergeant?” asked the boy.</p><p>“I’m not blind!” said the Sergeant. He turned away to wade through two feet of mud to another duty.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XII</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the 1 weary be at rest. There the prisoners rest together; they I hear not the voice of the Oppressor. The small and great are there, and the servant is freed from his master.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>For three days friend and foe had lived and died together in that wood, knowing the full horror of hunger and thirst, and the stench and agony of untended wounds.</p><p>There had been no battle worth noting by correspondents, but merely a skirmish which had worked itself away from the main course, out of reach of the ambulance. The men on both sides had been reported “missing.” That was all.</p><p>The Child from Paradise passed in and out amongst the sufferers, laying a cool hand on their brows, and whispering words of strong help and sweet memory, such as made broken men not ashamed to weep like tired children. Now and again he gave pitiful rebuke, or allayed the fury of despairing wrath, levelled against those who had driven them into the conflict. And to each he sought to shed abroad visions of that Kingdom which is the sure possession of the humble in spirit, but which the proud will never find. And wherever he passed, the dark-visaged Sons of Fear fled before him.</p><p>“Oh my God! One drop of water!” So the wounded officer moaned, as the death agony beaded on his brow.</p><p>There was a dull sound through the soaking grass, as of a pushing or dragging body, and presently a weak voice said:</p><p>“Here then, my friend!” and the water, but a few drops, trickled to the officer’s parched tongue.</p><p>Their glazing eyes met. The officer kissed the hand of the enemy private with his swollen lips.</p><p>The private sank back—his wound had reopened.</p><p>“There will be no war on the other side!” panted the officer. “Let us go together!”</p><p>“Yes—come with me. I will show you the way!” said the Child. And they saw him in all his radiance, with the crown of Love shining through the midnight hour.</p><p>So the men, hand in hand, rose up from the couch of blood and followed the Child.</p><p>And lo, on the other side, the friend and the enemy were not alone, for thousands upon thousands were passing from the battlefields of earth into the Wonderland of the Unseen.</p><p>But whether friend or foe, none might tell, for the uniforms of war and of nations, and the filthy rags of self-righteousness, pride, vain-glory, bitterness, and fury, had dropped away from them, and they stood together in one great company, bewildered and amazed.</p><p>Yet at sight of the Christ God who passed amongst them, every man bowed low and sank upon his knees, knowing that he was poor and naked and ashamed and unutterably sorry.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>For the Logos of God is a living thing, active and more cutting than any sword with double edge, penetrating to the very division of the soul and spirit, joints and marrow—scrutinizing the very thoughts and conceptions of the heart. And no created thing is hidden from Him: all things lie open and exposed before the eyes of Him with Whom we have to reckon.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>And the Child stayed for a season amongst the Souls that had passed from the battlefields of earth, seeking some Message that he might deliver to the sons of men.</p><p>“Have you no Message that I may take to earth?” he pleaded.</p><p>“They would not receive our Message, though we rose from the dead!” answered a young Soul sadly.</p><p>“They would refuse to believe that they also are naked, and ought to be ashamed and unutterably sorry!” said another.</p><p>“Then ye do not ask for revenge?” asked the Child.</p><p>“We want not revenge here, only forgiveness!” came the answer.</p><p>“But do ye not wish others to rush into the battle to take your places—to carry forward the great task ye undertook?”</p><p>“Child!” and a Soul put forth his arms beseechingly, “We would have them shoulder the task which we undertook! But tell them that we have failed—that they also will fail if they follow our footsteps. Tell them, as they honor their King, to have faith in His weapons and put themselves under His command!”</p><p>“And tell them,” urged another Soul, “that the cloud of witnesses above, has no pleasure in watching Conscripts of Fear thrust at each other’s hearts, in obedience to the dictates of the Prince of Darkness!”</p><p>“And tell them,” urged another Soul, “To cast off the weight of their world-armour, and put on the armour of Light! Tell them to run the course fearlessly, untrammeled by the snare of darkness, shielded only by Faith in God and their fellows—and with eyes fixed only upon the Christ God, the pioneer in the race!”</p><p>“And tell the prophets in the lands where you go, that they are, one and all leading the peoples in the way of Cain, because they have forgotten to keep themselves in the Love of God, and have cast from them the only weapon which can never fail!”</p><p>“I will tell them!” said the Child.</p><p>And the Souls of the slain kneeled in prayer that men might hear the messages they had sent.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>If thine enemy hunger, feed him, if he be thirsty, give him drink.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Lord, when saw we Thee an hungered, or thirsty, or sick?</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>The old man was chopping wood diligently and even feverishly, as it seemed to the Child.</p><p>His hands shook, and his lips muttered tremulously, while every now and then he glanced at the two soldiers who stood with fixed bayonets chatting together.</p><p>A little later, an officer and a sergeant, wearing a different uniform, came along and drew up at the spot.</p><p>“Whom are you guarding?” asked the officer.</p><p>“That old villain, sir!” and he spat towards the prisoner. “He has been feeding and sheltering two of the enemy. We caught him red-handed!”</p><p>“And we are making him useful, sir, until the church clock strikes six!” said the other with a grin.</p><p>The old man looked up. He knew they were talking of him, and throwing down his axe, he staggered towards them imploringly.</p><p>“Sir!” and he addressed the officer, “You are of the other army! You are not so hard in your country as we are! Can you not help? My wife is bedridden, and my sons—three of them—are fighting for you! I have given all I have for my poor country, and—”</p><p>“No use! You should have thought of all that before!” interrupted one of his guard sternly. “You know what you did, and you must take the consequences!”</p><p>“But they were hungry, and soaked with the rain, and ready to die, and they asked me in the name of the good God—”</p><p>“Oh—we’ve heard all that dozens of times! And as for the good God—they’d call on the Devil if it would serve them! Thank your stars you are alive until six o’clock, and get on with your work!”</p><p>“Oh, sir!” and he clutched at the officer’s coat, “Can’t you put in a word—”</p><p>“Get out!” and the guard flung him off, even as he frowned warningly at the officer.</p><p>“Don’t take any notice of him, sir. We’ve had our orders, and if we don’t deal smartly with these peasants and show them that we mean business, the whole countryside will get out of hand!”</p><p>“Poor beggar!” said Lieutenant Trueman, as he strode quickly away. “How one hates all this sordid part of the job!”</p><p>“You are not quite used to it yet, sir,” said the sergeant, not without kindliness in his tone. “But it’s waste of energy to worry over a peasant!”</p><p>“It is good that you hate it!” said the Child wistfully, as he touched the officer’s arm, “for it is written, ‘Woe unto them that call evil good and good evil, that put darkness for light and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!”</p><p>“Why—lovely Child! What are you doing alone in this awful place?” exclaimed he.</p><p>“I am the Child from Paradise, where we call light, light, and darkness, darkness. Those who walk in darkness stumble and do the deeds of darkness. Have you then no help to offer to an old man caught in this net of evil?”</p><p>“If I could—” faltered the officer, “but this is war-time, and by the rules of war—”</p><p>“War is also of the darkness!” said the Child. “Why do you not throw down your arms and lift up the weapons of Light before it is too late?”</p><p>“Too late?” stammered the young man.</p><p>“The hour is coming when the world and the church will bow at your feet, and you will know then—what is Darkness and what is Light!”</p><p>“God in Heaven!” said the young man. “Did you see him, sergeant?”</p><p>“See whom, sir?” and he struck a match.</p><p>“Oh—no one,” said the officer, as he hurried on with flushed cheeks and a wildly beating heart.</p>
<hr />
<p>As the clock from the Church of the Blessed Magdalene struck six, the old man stood blindfolded against the wall.</p><p>“Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye did it unto Me!” said the Child, as he grasped one of the prisoner’s bound hands.</p><p>“Fire!” rang out the command.</p><p>But the old man, looking far beyond the bandage tied between him and all earthly light, cried aloud:</p>
<p>“Lord! when saw I Thee hungry, or thirsty, or cold, or naked?”</p><p>And the answer came.</p>
<hr />
<p>“Get him buried quickly, before the villagers make any fuss!” ordered the officer in charge.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 epub:type="title">
        Part <span epub type="z3998:roman">IV</span>
</h2>
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XV</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Keep cool! Keep awake! Your enemy the devil prowls like a roaring lion looking out for someone to devour. Resist him. Keep your foothold in the faith, and learn to pay the same tax of suffering as the rest of your brotherhood.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph"><p>
Therefore at this Fair, are all such merchandise sold, as houses, lands, trades, places, honors, preferments, titles, countries, kingdoms, lusts, pleasures, and delights of all sorts. And behold, as the Pilgrims entered into the Fair, all the people were moved and the Town itself, as it were in a hubbub about them… but the men being patient, and not rendering railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing, and giving good words for bad, and kindness for injuries done, some men in the Fair, that were more observing and less prejudiced than the rest, began to check and blame the baser sort for their continual abuses done by them to the Pilgrims.
</p></blockquote>
</header>
<p>Now it happened that some of the Sons of Fear held deep consultation together at this time, for it had come to their knowledge that a group of young people, calling themselves Pilgrims of Peace, were wandering about the country, preaching boldly to all who would listen to them, that Love was the only weapon by which Peace could be established on earth.</p><p>They spoke with such sympathy towards the sorrow-stricken, such modesty, and showed such profound desire to bring light into the darkness, that men and women listened to them thoughtfully, and went back to their homes wondering whether there could be any Light in this strange Message.</p><p>It was high time that the Sons of Fear set to work in good earnest to combat such a danger to their Prince’s Cause.</p><p>The Pilgrims had even had the audacity to approach the town of Thorough, the domain of Sir Joshua Power himself, where night and day the furnaces roared, and men and women toiled and sweated and made excellent money, in the manufacture of the weapons of Fear.</p><p>They had in advance placarded the town with a poster which amounted to an insult to the inhabitants.</p><blockquote>
<p>A NEW COMMANDMENT:</p>
<p>The Darkness is past, and the true Light now shineth.</p>
<p>He that saith he is in the Light, and hateth his brother, is in Darkness, even until now.</p>
<p>This is the Message that ye heard from the beginning, that we should love one another.</p>
<p>Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer, and ye know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him.</p>
<p>Perfect Love casteth out Fear, for Fear hath torment.</p>
</blockquote>
<p>Luckily, however, terrible things had been happening within the last few days at the seat of war, and my lord Cruelty had been achieving such a series of successes that he had been compelled to rush away to report himself to his Prince, so that he might celebrate his triumph by a very orgy of mocking laughter.</p>
<p>Moreover, deep trouble had befallen Thorough, for news had leaked through that the very flower of its youth—sent forth but a month before in pride and hope—had been cut to pieces and annihilated upon the altar of War.</p>
<p>Places were empty by the firesides—knitting was flung aside unfinished—parcels were left untied—fathers and brothers talked low together, and the women looked into the future with scared and bewildered eyes.</p>
<p>The Sons of Fear counted upon a sure victory, for it would be a simple matter to stir such sorrow and such righteous indignation to flame.</p>
<p>Therefore, it was decided that the Preacher’s study was the surest opening for the attack, and one of the Sons of Fear volunteered to suggest to the Preacher his text.</p>
<p>“Thine eye shall find out all thine enemies: thy right hand shall find out those that hate thee. Thou shalt make them as a fiery oven in the time of thine anger. The LORD shall swallow them up in His wrath, and the fire shall devour them. Their fruit shalt thou destroy from the earth, and their seed from among the children of men.”</p>
<p>So the words of fire rang from the pulpit, and the Preacher made the people quiver under the terror of what would befall their country, if the arm of the LORD were stayed prematurely, and certain misguided persons—for aught he knew, in league with the enemy—were allowed to visit the town and proclaim their dangerous doctrine. They owed it to all those who had laid down their noble young lives as a sacrifice to Jesus Christ, to resist any attempt to weaken the hands of the nation in prosecuting this war, until the enemy was crushed beyond the possibility of rising again.</p>
<p>“And now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost,” said the Preacher, and as he passed to the Altar, to kneel before the uplifted cross, he felt that his effort had been supremely successful.</p>
<p>As he was leaving the vestry, he was not surprised to receive a visit from Lady Power. She was the wife of Sir Joshua Power, the chief inspirer and director of the Thorough Armament works—the man of the moment, upon whom the whole Empire was now depending.</p>
<p>The Preacher held out his hand cordially.</p>
<p>“No—” she said cooly, “I did not come to shake hands, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fearing, I came to be abominably rude!”</p>
<p>“I beg your pardon, Lady Power,” said the Preacher. He knew that Lady Power was somewhat erratic, but this—</p>
<p>“I am considered to be a straightforward woman, and I prefer to say exactly what I think and be done with it.”</p>
<p>“I am sure that anything you have to say, Lady Power—” he began, knitting his brows.</p>
<p>“What I have to say is simple, but perhaps not nice,” and she smiled relentingly. “I have listened most carefully to your sermon this evening, and I have come to the reluctant conclusion that you are a fool, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fearing!”</p>
<p>“From any other woman,” he exclaimed, flushing deeply—</p>
<p>“I know. But I am just the one woman who can tell you—think it over!” and again she smiled.</p>
<p>“Incomprehensible!” murmured the Preacher, as he watched the lady depart. He was effectually shaken down from his pinnacle of complacency. And from Lady Power of all people!</p>
<p>She was exactly the person of all others who, he would have thought—</p>
<p>“It is really of no importance what you thought,” said the Child quietly. “Lady Power is right. The fool hath said in his heart, ‘There is no God!’ That is what you have taught your people tonight! It is a pity—for it is a lie!”</p>
<p>“I must have dreamed it all!” said the Preacher uncomfortably, as he hurried home to his Sunday supper. Happily his wife would reassure him.</p>
<p>And meanwhile the church-goers poured into the streets, and excitedly passed on the interesting news to their neighbours, and a strong passion awoke against the coming strangers; for it was refreshing to have some target at which to shoot their arrows of misery and indignation. Were not these people friends of the enemy, traitors to their country, and likely to interfere with the legitimate trade of Thorough?</p>
<p>The Child, passing in and out amongst them, was aware of the unholy influence, for the very children talked fiercely, or shouted rough revengeful songs, or quarrelled bitterly with one another.</p>
<p>When the river of righteous indignation and the dark waters of self-interest happen to run in the same channel, the torrent is well-nigh almighty.</p>
<p>The Preacher, obviously the chief authority on righteousness, had proclaimed that the Pilgrims must be resisted, and the Sons of Fear had determined that it was no longer safe in their Prince’s interests that this Message of the New Commandment should even be heard.</p>
<p>So it came about that the people, moved by the subtle influence, resorted with unholy glee to the cheap device of tearing the New Commandment from the hoardings.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>This is a rebellious people, lying children, children that will not hear the law of the Lord.</p>
<p>Which say to the seers, “See not!” and to the prophets “Prophesy not unto us right things: speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits: get you out of the way. Turn aside out of the path. Cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us.”</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>It was on the following afternoon that the news was bruited about that the Pilgrims had arrived.</p>
<p>There were five of them, three women and two men, and as they walked up the main street with knapsacks on their backs, they had laughed and chatted together with evident effrontery, as though quite unaware of the indignant glances thrown at them from all sides.</p>
<p>They were obviously of no social standing, for their tourist clothes were old and weather-beaten, and somewhat to the town’s surprise, they wore no uniform, and there was nothing to distinguish them, except that in place of the universally-worn national badge, they displayed on their coats a small silver star.</p>
<p>They disappeared into a modest lodging, and the people were left to arrange for their final effort in the market place early in the evening.</p>
<p>“I wonder what the excitement is this afternoon?” said “Little One” as she drew back the curtain.</p>
<p>“Never mind the street, come and eat!” laughed “Mother.”</p>
<p>The five had given themselves nicknames for convenience. “Yes—it’s good to find food again,” admitted Bottom Dog, as he pulled up the chairs to the rickety table.</p>
<p>“Perhaps there are some more boys going off to the slaughter,” said Princess pitifully, as she looked out over Little One’s shoulder. “Oh, dear! One feels like a whiff of thistledown in the face of this storm!”</p>
<p>“Yes—fancy five of us sticking ourselves up to think that we see something different from what the world is so sure about! Don’t you all feel futile?”</p>
<p>Little One, in her doubts, her despairs, her merriment, and untiring courage was the refreshment point in the party.</p>
<p>“The thistledown goes where the wind of God drives it, and it carries seeds,” remarked a big red-haired under-graduate.</p>
<p>“Right as usual, Captain,” admitted the girl. “Now, Oh! bramble jelly! How lovely!”</p>
<p>They enjoyed their early supper keenly, and enjoyed their conversation over their strange and oft-times droll experiences. Presently, however, the sallow deep-eyed young man who had dubbed himself Bottom Dog, pushed back his chair.</p>
<p>“I should say it is about time we made a move,” he suggested, “we want to catch them as they come out from work.”</p>
<p>Bottom Dog had started life as a miner, had gravitated to a working men’s college, and was opening his eyes to the world and to God with a freshness of vision which was likely to carry him far.</p>
<p>“Yes—we mustn’t be late!” agreed the Captain. “Then shall we?”</p>
<p>They all understood the suggestion, and kneeling round the table, they waited in silence.</p>
<p>“O God! Help us tonight,” pleaded the Princess presently; “we are not able to go out against this multitude except through Thy strength. O Father—fill us with wisdom and faith in the Power of Love—and—courage when the great Fear comes down upon us.”</p>
<p>“And, O loving Father,” said the Mother tenderly, “fill us with divine sympathy for all the sorrowing hearts in this town. Comfort them with Thy comfort—for indeed they have done what they could!”</p>
<p>“O Father—keep us from turning traitor to Jesus Christ tonight,” said Little One.</p>
<p>Neither of the men spoke, and presently, after a few minutes’ silence, they rose.</p>
<p>“I have a strong impression,” said the Captain, “that we are to know something tonight of what it means to be wrestling—not against flesh and blood, but against the Rulers of Darkness and Spiritual wickedness in High Places. I cannot tell you why I think this, but I do.”</p>
<p>“I know!” said Bottom Dog gravely. “All day it has felt to me as though something were trying to stop me from saying my say—telling me, in fact, that after all I have nothing to say!”</p>
<p>“But you know that you have,” said the Mother quickly.</p>
<p>“Yes—just the Message,” he answered her.</p>
<p>They collected their bundles of leaflets, and as they came out into the street, they saw that a crowd had collected round the door.</p>
<p>The Captain looked round keenly.</p>
<p>“Would you women like to leave it to us tonight?” he asked hastily.</p>
<p>“Oh, no!” they exclaimed, trying to smile away the anxiety they saw in his face.</p>
<p>“Why—what do you take us for?” chaffed Little One.</p>
<p>“Then let us keep close together!” he said, and he and Bottom Dog took the outside of the path.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Ye know that by this craft we have our wealth. So that not only is this our craft in danger to be set at nought, but also that the temple of the great goddess Diana should be despised, and her magnificence should be destroyed, whom all the world worshippeth!</p>
<p>And when the people heard these sayings, they were full of wrath and cried out, saying, “Great is Diana!”</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>And the Sons of Fear mocked at the Child, as he stood in the market place, for an infuriated mob, three thousand strong, was howling at five young people who were standing on the steps of the statue of a great man who had once stood out against the savagery of the world on behalf of the slave.</p>
<p>“If you would but listen to our Message!” shouted the Captain in a voice of thunder.</p>
<p>“Damn your Message! Get out! Traitors! Who pays you? Down with the lot! Why aren’t you in the firing line! Aye—let him have it!” and a volley of mud was flung at the group.</p>
<p>The idea took fire. Of course—that was the thing to do.</p>
<p>Mud, refuse, eggs came flying. A rotten one crashed into Little One’s face.</p>
<p>Bottom Dog leaped forward.</p>
<p>“All right!” gasped Little One—“Don’t do anything!”</p>
<p>“Duck ’em in the river!” shouted a voice. A man pushed up the steps and dragged at the Princess’s arm.</p>
<p>“Don’t strike him!” she exclaimed, seeing the nadness in Bottom Dog’s face.</p>
<p>He pushed the man back into the crowd, and pushed the girl behind him.</p>
<p>“Give him a bit of the front!” shouted a man—“same as our lads have had!” and he aimed a handful of stones with skilled accuracy.</p>
<p>Bottom Dog put one hand up before his face, and held out the other for support.</p>
<p>“Hold on to me!” said the Mother, putting her arms about him.</p>
<p>“For shame!” screamed a woman’s voice.</p>
<p>“Yes—drop it!” shouted a man. The police came pushing their way slowly through the crowd.</p>
<p>“Enemies! Spies! Cowards!” clamored the voices.</p>
<p>A man leaped to the steps and held out a leaflet.</p>
<p>“Love your enemies! I say, Curse them! An eye for an eye is good enough for us!” He pitched the bundle out into the melée, and a wild scramble ensued.</p>
<p>“Oh!” screamed Little One. “Don’t hurt that Child!” and she struggled to push past the man, that she might save the Child.</p>
<p>“Take that, you hypocrite! What do you care for children!” cried a woman, as she crashed her fist into Little One’s face.</p>
<p>When the girl recovered herself, she found the Child’s hand in hers.</p>
<p>“Look! There is a Child amongst them! It’s abominable!” cried a young factory girl hysterically.</p>
<p>“Hush!” breathed a young man at her side. “Yon’s no Child!”</p>
<p>“Come! You’d better clear out before there’s more mischief done!” said the Chief Constable, as he and half a dozen men shouldered their way to the steps.</p>
<p>But a sudden hush fell upon the raging mob—a pause of startled fear.</p>
<p>“O Jerusalem, Jerusalem!” cried the Child. “Thou that killest the prophets and stonest them that are sent unto thee! How often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, but ye would not! Behold! Your house is left unto you desolate!”</p>
<p>It was necessary that every eye should see him and every ear hear.</p>
<p>“He’s an angel!” cried a little boy, held up in safety in his father’s arms. “An angel, Daddy! Let me go to him!”</p>
<p>“Nonsense, kid!” said his father. Yet he looked in consternation towards the steps. The Child was not there.</p>
<p>An amazed, uncertain temper swept over trie crowd.</p>
<p>“It’s a shame!” cried the woman who had first cried it. “Let them speak! Let us hear what it is they want to say!”</p>
<p>“Come!” said the officer peremptorily “You’ll do no good here—only rouse their tempers worse! You’d better come along to the police station—you’ll be safest there!”</p>
<p>It was just at that moment, that the attention of the mob was turned to a violent hooting of a motor car which insisted on the right of way.</p>
<p>“Straight in amongst them, Morrison,” ordered a woman, as she rose up in the car. “I guessed there would be the devil to pay!”</p>
<p>The huge car attacked the crowd with a resistless might, and with cries and curses, the people pushed back in all directions.</p>
<p>Who dared to come into a crowd like that? “It’s Lady Power!” ran from lip to lip. What did this mean?</p>
<p>“Cowards! Cowards!” she shot forth to right and left of her as the car made its way right to the steps of the statue.</p>
<p>“Why aren’t you protecting these people?” cried Lady Power stormily to the Chief Constable.</p>
<p>“We are doing our best—” he began—</p>
<p>“Nonsense! Is that man injured?” and she pointed to Bottom Dog who was leaning his face down against the Mother’s shoulder.</p>
<p>“We are taking them to the police station, my lady; they will be safest there.”</p>
<p>“Nonsense!” she repeated. “They will be safest with me! Come—everyone of you into the car—there is room enough!”</p>
<p>“If you could take this man, madam!” said the Mother earnestly. “He is really hurt!”</p>
<p>“And we are all too dreadfully filthy!” said Little One whimsically. She was a woebegone figure enough, with her egg-bespattered face and clothes, and a red bruise burning on her cheek.</p>
<p>“Why does everybody talk nonsense!” said the lady irately. “Come—let us get away from these lunatics—they make me ill!”</p>
<p>Very carefully they helped Bottom Dog in first, and the others followed, ashamed to seat themselves in such a car.</p>
<p>A murmur ran in and out amongst the crowd.</p>
<p>Lady Power was taking them to the Castle. Had they blundered?</p>
<p>The car hooted threateningly, and the crowd which had closed in, was rolled backwards once more.</p>
<p>“Boo!” yelled a few determined spirits.</p>
<p>“Shut up!” said their neighbours.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good? But, and if ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye; and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled; but sanctify the Lord God in your hearts; and be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and reverence.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>It would be difficult to exaggerate Lady Power’s kindness to that shattered little party.</p>
<p>Baths, fresh clothes, luxurious rooms, everything possible was done to rob them of the sense of physical suffering and discomfort.</p>
<p>But grief remained, and as the Captain, the Princess, and Little One sat together in the sitting room placed at their disposal, they talked in anxious tones about Bottom Dog.</p>
<p>He was lying upstairs, with ice on his forehead, attended by the Mother and a male nurse who was in the Castle. Lady Power had telephoned for an eye specialist—he was upstairs at the moment, and the three awaited the outcome.</p>
<p>“It ought to have happened to me!” groaned the Captain.</p>
<p>“You take too much upon yourself, Captain!” said the Princess whimsically, to hide her feelings. “I fancy we are all under orders!”</p>
<p>She looked quaintly royal in Lady Power’s handsome tea-gown. It suited her wonderfully, for she had long cast aside her own finery, since she mobilised for Peace.</p>
<p>“And poor Little One!” she added. “That ought to have happened to me!”</p>
<p>Little One screwed up her face, one cheek of which was turning purple and red.</p>
<p>“That would never have done, Princess!” she mocked. “I never did set up for being a beauty, and I shan’t be in the least offended if you prefer to look another way. The only thing I really hate is that the fist should have belonged to a woman. I wonder—” she anointed her cheek with some soothing ointment Lady Power had provided.</p>
<p>“Yes?” asked the Captain.</p>
<p>“Only—I wonder whether <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul felt a little bit scared when they yelled at him for two hours! I should so love to ask him.”</p>
<p>The door opened, and the Mother came in. They started round, but no one spoke.</p>
<p>“The doctor has gone,” she said.</p>
<p>Little One leaped up and threw her arms round her.</p>
<p>“Dearest, don’t cry!”</p>
<p>“No—I’m sorry!” stammered the girl.</p>
<p>“Only—Captain—he wants you!”</p>
<p>The Captain started forward, and suddenly his lip quivered. “Mother—you can’t mean—”</p>
<p>She nodded. “The doctor can do nothing.”</p>
<p>“Not both,” cried Little One.</p>
<p>“Both!” breathed the girl.</p>
<p>“Does he know?” whispered the Captain.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>When the Captain entered the bedroom, he glanced nervously at the figure whose face was swathed in bandages.</p>
<p>“Is that you, Captain?” asked a cheerful voice.</p>
<p>“Yes—Oh Bottom Dog—you are blind?” and he kneeled by the bed and gripped the other’s hand.</p>
<p>“Don’t worry! So are hundreds of better men than me—blind for their country!”</p>
<p>“Are you in pain?”</p>
<p>“A bit—but they tell me it will go off. They have given me something. I say—Captain! It is good of Him to have let a chap like me suffer for Him! Speak—old man!”</p>
<p>“It’s no use—I can’t—”</p>
<p>“Then let us have a ‘Silence’ together,” he answered, and the Captain, understanding what he meant, bowed his head.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on edge.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>The three girls crouched over the fire, talking together seriously. Two points still remained as mysteries.</p>
<p>Who was that beautiful Child? Why had Lady Power, of all people, come to their rescue?</p>
<p>Then there came a tap at the door, and Lady Power entered.</p>
<p>The three jumped up, and Little One offered her the big chair, but she refused it and squatted down on a low seat in the chimney corner.</p>
<p>“Well, foolish people!” she began mockingly, “I expect you have been amusing yourselves in trying to discover why I came to your rescue—Lady Power, of all people!”</p>
<p>“We had!” admitted the Princess.</p>
<p>“That gown suits you, my dear!”</p>
<p>The Princess’s Madonna-like beauty was exactly what Lady Power appreciated.</p>
<p>“Doesn’t it!” exclaimed Little One. “You know, Lady Power, we have never seen her dressed up properly before—Pilgrims don’t do that kind of thing—though they love it, all the same!”</p>
<p>“I see!” mused Lady Power, looking at Little One intently. “You all deserve, of course, imprisonment in the Castle dungeons! Your object in coming to Thorough is, I understand, to turn me and mine penniless into the streets! No—don’t offer me complimentary lies! I should be sorry if either of you descended to a lie! You preach that the trade in armaments is of the devil, don’t you?”</p>
<p>Her eyes twinkled, as she noticed their embarrassment.</p>
<p>“Come, if you were not afraid of that mob, you are surely not afraid of one woman? What do you say, you poor disfigured child!” and she turned upon Little One.</p>
<p>“Oh well, Lady Power, of course you are involved in the evil system, and—”</p>
<p>“And?”</p>
<p>“I am sorry!”</p>
<p>“Very diplomatic! Then in your wisdom, do you consider it a crime to allow oneself to be involved in a system?”</p>
<p>“Oh—I don’t know! That is what is so puzzling!”</p>
<p>“Tell me, Child! What is the Message you would have given to those people, if they had not been so perfectly mad?”</p>
<p>“Do ask the others—they know better!” But Lady Power shook her head. “The others look too wise! I want a child’s answer.</p>
<p>“Oh well—we should have told them that all men are the children of One Father and that Our Father has forbidden His children to kill one another.”</p>
<p>“Even if these same brothers and sisters would kill other brothers and sisters if they could?”</p>
<p>“That is what is so difficult!” said the girl frankly, “but because one brother does a wicked thing, it doesn’t really help for another brother to do another wicked thing—that only makes more wickedness in the world.”</p>
<p>“But suppose a brother were going to do a wicked thing to a sister, and another brother could stop him doing that wicked thing, by doing what you call a wicked thing—how then?”</p>
<p>“That’s what I’ve thought and thought about, until I’m nearly crazy!” said the girl. “Only—Lady Power—you are talking as if the Father were not alive! We have just to obey—as Jesus Christ obeyed. Jesus Christ was not a crank!”</p>
<p>“Only He failed—they crucified Him,” she said, looking keenly at the girl.</p>
<p>“I know. He was crucified, but He didn’t fail! It is we who have failed! If all down the ages, men and women had been willing to love the world to the death, the world would have been saved long ago! And so—we are all guilty of this war!”</p>
<p>For a moment there was silence, then Little One broke out impetuously: “Lady Power! Wouldn’t you be proud to die, if that would teach the world that wholesale murder is not the way to Peace?”</p>
<p>“Incorrigible! We don’t call war murder!”</p>
<p>“Only it is, you know! War is the unjustest thing in the world!” Little One was losing her diffidence and her enthusiasm carried her headlong. “Nobody has a fair trial in war, and the innocent are robbed and hurt and killed, and other nations not in the quarrel suffer intolerably. And it isn’t even the righteous cause that wins! The cause that wins, is the cause that goes directest to the Devil for its methods—Oh—I beg your pardon!”</p>
<p>“Quite unnecessary. You are getting clearer! It is refreshing to discover someone who believes in the Devil!”</p>
<p>“I believe, Lady Power!” said the girl impressively, “that if the Devil could plot out a plan by which one nation could just press a button and wipe the other nation out—there would be some nation that would do it—they’d <em>have</em> to do it, in case the other one did it first!”</p>
<p>Lady Power gave a short laugh.</p>
<p>“Probably you are right! Go on!”</p>
<p>“Oh—but that is only half the Message—about killing one’s brother I mean! What we really want to do is to dispel the awful delusion, engineered by the Prince of Darkness and Fear, that there is no other way except his way! But there is! If they would only open their hearts to the Spirit of Love, and dare the Prince of Fear—he would fly before the glory in their eyes. Princess! I have talked such a lot! Do recite that Buddha story, while I take breath!”</p>
<p>The Princess smiled at Lady Power, and began in her perfectly modulated voice:</p>
<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem"><p>
<span>Once on the errands of his mercy bent,</span><br />
<span>Buddha, the holy and benevolent,</span><br />
<span>Met a foul monster, huge and fierce of look,</span><br />
<span>Whose awful voice the hills and forests shook;</span><br />
<span>“O Son of Peace,” the giant cried, “thy fate</span><br />
<span>Is sealed at last, and love shall yield to hate—”</span><br />
<span>The unarmed Buddha, looking with no trace</span><br />
<span>Of fear or anger in the monster’s face</span><br />
<span>In pity said, “Poor fiend, even thee I love.”</span></p>
<p><span>Lo! as he spake, the sky-tall terror shrank</span><br />
<span>To hand-breadth size, the huge abhorrence sank</span><br />
<span>Into the form and fashion of a dove.</span><br />
<span>And where the thunder of its rage was heard</span><br />
<span>Circling above him sweetly sang the bird.</span><br />
<span>“Hate hath no harm for love,” so ran the song,</span><br />
<span>“And Peace unweaponed conquers every wrong.”</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>“Of course you may argue, Lady Power, that the Monster might have chawed him up, and then—there would have been no Buddha—yes, there would though!”</p>
<p>“And so my dear, you are setting your little person up to fight the Prince of Fear?”</p>
<p>“Not setting myself up!” she remonstrated. “Only—what an awful thing it will be if—we are right! I simply can’t endure to think of that sometimes—What all the nice people will do when they find out that it was a delusion! The people are being slaughtered by the million—not by an earthquake, or something clean like that, but by one another! Every hour this war goes on the Body of Christ is being crucified again. Sometimes”—she spoke dreamily—“I seem to see that the marks on His hands and His feet and His brow and His side have turned blood-red again. And if we think these things, must we not speak? You yourself, Lady Power, would speak if you really thought you had received a Message of Love and Hope to a dying world. How could I ever forgive myself, if afterwards, when it is all over and the people wake up to sanity again and understand the folly of it all—I had been afraid to offer Jesus Christ’s Message?”</p>
<p>“Foolish young dreamer!” answered Lady Power softly.</p>
<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
<p><span>Dreamer of dreams, we take the taunt with gladness,</span><br />
<span>Knowing that God, beyond the years we see</span><br />
<span>Hath wrought the dreams, that count with us for madness,</span><br />
<span>Into the substance of the life to be.</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>The older woman did not reply immediately, but she settled herself very upright, as though she were nerving herself for an effort.</p>
<p>“Still—you dreamers—have perhaps a little pity in your hearts for those of us who are tramping through the mud and the darkness, created—if you will—by your Prince of Fear?”</p>
<p>“I haven’t been so horrible as to make you think we haven’t!” exclaimed Little One vaguely.</p>
<p</p>
<p>“Children,” she said in a strangely moving tone. “Let me tell you the secret of my home, so that I may know whether you have any message for me and mine!</p>
<p>“My only son is home from the front. He is not wounded. He is upstairs with a companion. Sometimes we think he is sane, and at others we are sure he is insane—God knows the truth.</p>
<p>“The great doctors who have visited him tell me he is merely nervous!</p>
<p>“The only son of the armament king ought to have borne the front better. But he was always sensitive—I remember when he was quite a little fellow—but I needn’t trouble you with that!”</p>
<p>She stooped and poked the fire restlessly.</p>
<p>“When the call came, of course he went with the rest. Once he did say something to me about not being quite sure it was right to kill—but I told him I should never be able to lift up my head if he did not do his share with the others.</p>
<p>“He made no more protest. He trained and went out, and we were proud of him.</p>
<p>“It happened in his first charge. They were rushing down hill—or so we suppose, for George’s accounts vary—when suddenly one of the enemy—a boy we imagine—threw away his bayonet, put his hands over his face and screamed for mercy.</p>
<p>“My son understood the language well enough, but it was naturally impossible to stop the mad rush. He ran the lad through, and now, day and night, he gets no rest, but cries out that he is a murderer.</p>
<p>“We have explained that he was not in the least to blame, because war is war, and he only did his duty. Nothing heals the wound, nor indeed touches the sore. I have tried religion. Our Preacher has been several times. He explains to George that he is absolutely guiltless of the crime—I mean, he explains that there was no crime. He has told him that he ought to be proud that Jesus Christ stood by him and gave him strength to serve his country.</p>
<p>“But nothing helps. George keeps repeating an absurd bit of doggerel he has picked up. Thousands of times he has said it, I believe.</p>
<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem"><p>
 <span>Ef you take a sword and dror it</span><br />
 <span>And go stick a feller through,</span><br />
 <span>Government ain’t to answer for it—</span><br />
 <span>God will send the bill to you!</span>
 </p></blockquote>
<p>“Nothing now matters to me in life, but to bring back my son to his senses. It was when I saw the poster you had dared to put up, that I knew in a flash you were right.”</p>
<p>“God cannot be so bankrupt that He finds it necessary to put the youth of the world to the torments of conscience in order to bring in His Kingdom. There is some other way, and God have mercy upon us until we find it,” said Princess.</p>
<p>“A Colonel told me the other day, that we ought to take our Message off to the Eastland, where the men are being rushed by the battalion to destruction,” said Little One. “He said he had asked at least twenty brother officers if it could be possible that war was the way out; and they all said what you have said, Lady Power—that there must be another way.”</p>
<p>“Suppose, Little One, that I take you upstairs to see my son—what would you tell him?”</p>
<p>“I don’t know!” said the girl fearfully. “I think though—” she added bravely “that God would give me the Message!”</p>
<p>“Come then,” said Lady Power, “if you are not too tired?”</p>
<p>“Oh no,” said Little One nervously.</p>
<p>As she followed Lady Power along the galleries, she prayed pitifully for help. What was this strange task her Father had given her to do? One of the others would have done it so much better. All she realised clearly was that the only possible medicine for such a wound must be the bare truth.</p>
<p>They found the young officer playing chess with his companion, and he took no notice when his mother entered.</p>
<p>“George, I have brought you a visitor,” and she motioned to the attendant to leave them alone.</p>
<p>The officer rose, shook hands, and offered chairs to his visitors, but there was no welcome in his face.</p>
<p>“I hope you don’t mind me looking so dreadfully hideous!” said Little One. “I got hurt accidentally—”</p>
<p>“She has brought a message for you, George,” said his mother in the deprecating tone she had recently learnt.</p>
<p>“Who from?” he demanded, looking at the girl with scared eyes.</p>
<p>“From the Father in Heaven,” she said quickly. Even yet she had no notion how she was to proceed.</p>
<p>“Have you come to tell me that I am a hero, and that I only did my duty—nobly?” he asked suspiciously.</p>
<p>“Oh no!” she said simply, “I have come to tell you that you are a murderer.”</p>
<p>Lady Power held her breath—yet she need not have feared.</p>
<p>A strange illumination dawned on the young man’s face.</p>
<p>“Quick! Let me tell you about it!” he said excitedly.</p>
<p>“It was tremendously steep—and we were rushing down”—he rose from his chair and began to demonstrate as he talked. “And he was panting up the hill—such a boy—and he threw down his arms and shrieked—and—it was too late. I cannot remember whether I stopped myself or—I think not!” and he put his hand to his head. “I ran him through like this!” and he lunged forward. “We learnt with sacks and sawdust, but this was different—my bayonet was wet—and it stuck—and he lay on the stones, and his helmet flew off—he had curly hair and one of his front teeth was broken. The others drove on behind me. I stayed—and then—I am not quite sure.”</p>
<p>“It was very dreadful,” said the girl, looking him in the eyes. “Sit down again, please. It was a great sin to kill your brother.”</p>
<p>He laid his hand upon her arm, as she gently forced him back into his chair.</p>
<p>Looking suspiciously at his mother, he whispered:</p>
<p>“Everybody that comes into this room tells me I have done a great deed!”</p>
<p>“It doesn’t matter what they say!” said the girl calmly. “It only really matters what Jesus Christ says.”</p>
<p>“A murderer ought to be hanged!” he said doggedly.</p>
<p>“Jesus Christ never said so. Are you sorry, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Power, that you killed your brother?”</p>
<p>“Sorry!” he looked at her increduously. “I would die to bring him back—I tried—I leant over him—I forget—”</p>
<p>“Don’t trouble to remember!” she said firmly. “Let us tell God that you are sorry.” She felt as though she were walking with a friend along the edge of a precipice and that at any moment she might plunge him down to destruction.</p>
<p>“Do you know—” he began confidently, “that a man once said:
<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem"><p>
 <span>Ef you take a sword and dror it</span><br />
 <span>And go stick a feller through</span><br />
 <span>Government ain’t to answer for it,</span><br />
 <span>God will send the bill to you!</span>
 </p></blockquote>
<p>“That’s wrong,” said the girl, shaking her head at him.</p>
<p>“Jesus Christ never sends us in bills we can’t pay. He pays Himself. When you killed your brother, you pierced the heart of Jesus Christ. Do you remember that a murderer was lifted up on a cross beside Jesus Christ and they died together? Come—shall we kneel?”</p>
<p>Still Lady Power stood motionless, aware that this girl was fighting a battle in the cause of her son’s sanity. Yet as the first words of prayer broke from Little One’s lips, she sank down on her knees behind the flowers.</p>
<p>“Oh, merciful Father! Thy child has murdered a man! But Thou art pitiful and of tender mercy, and dost never turn any away who are sorry for their sin. Forgive Thy child because he has murdered his brother. Thou knowest how much he was to blame and how little he was to blame. Oh, Father! Thou knowest that each one of us is guilty of murder who has ever harboured an unforgiving thought against his brother or wished him evil. Do Thou now restore Thy son to health and strength, and may we all devote ourselves from this day forward to helping to slay the monster of war by the spirit of Love, so that we may indeed save the peoples lying helpless under the oppression of the Devil.</p>
<p>“In the Name of Jesus Christ—Amen!”</p>
<p>They rose. The young man sat back in his chair and looked at her with a quieter expression.</p>
<p>“It is good to know the truth,” he said.</p>
<p>“I found out that killing was murder when I found out that hating was murder,” she said.</p>
<p>“And were you afraid?”</p>
<p>“Horribly! And then I found out that Jesus Christ loved to the uttermost—me, you know! I can’t lift up my hand against anyone else, when He doesn’t!”</p>
<p>“I am sorry you have had an accident,” he said anxiously.</p>
<p>“Oh—I shall be all right!” she said brightly, as she rose.</p>
<p>“Goodnight, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Power!”</p>
<p>“Goodnight!” he said reluctantly.</p>
<p>“Thank you, my dear,” said Lady Power, as she escorted her to her room.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XX</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Brothers! You are not in the Darkness for the Day to surprise you like thieves. You are all sons of the Light and sons of the Day.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>We must be sober, we who belong to the Day, clad in faith and love as our coat of mail, with the hope of salvation as our helmet—for God destined us not for Wrath, but to gain salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ, Who died for us, that waking in life or sleeping in death, we should live together with Him. Therefore comfort yourselves together.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>The Captain was sound asleep, for Bottom Dog had promised to call if he needed anything.</p>
<p>The opiate had had its soothing effect, and as it released its hold, it threw a last dream to its weary patient.</p>
<p>It was a dream of deep, deep blue and purple seas, and rich green seaweeds and brown and yellow and indigo rocks, and tossing white foam and laughing waves and gentle lappings of an indolent ocean.</p>
<p>And Olive was there—he could hear the sound of her laughter and the sweetness of her voice, and feel her hand upon his arm—exquisite sensations mingled with the glory of the sea and the sky and the scented turf.</p>
<p>But something broke the dream. What was it? Olive was no longer there—the waters roared, the sky blackened—there was the booming of guns—shrieks of agony—cries for help—and somewhere out of the darkness, there came Olive’s voice, calling to him tauntingly:</p>
<p>“I thought I was engaged to a <em>Man!</em> A man is no man who cannot fight and die for his king!”</p>
<p>The sleeper gave a start and waked.</p>
<p>From force of habit, he threw back the bedclothes to see if the light had come.</p>
<p>With a groan he covered his head. Never again would he know when it was morning.</p>
<p>The pain had returned to his eyes. He was, somehow, glad.</p>
<p>Blind! Blind! He breathed the word over and over again, trying to take in the appalling meaning of it all.</p>
<p>An overwhelming sense of need possessed him to escape to his cottage home, away up amongst the hills by the lead mine—to get back to his mother.</p>
<p>She had been so proud to think that he had turned into what she called a “gentleman.” But she would not despise him now. She would never thrust him out of her sight as useless. She would comfort him and share her last crust with him, and perhaps—she would lead him up the fell side in the evening, and tell him that the sunset was there!</p>
<p>He threw back the clothes again. Was he dreaming still?</p>
<p>Surely he <em>was</em> blind? Yet standing by his bedside was a Child in sunshine robes and a crown of warm light encircling his head.</p>
<p>“As one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you!” said the Child.</p>
<p>The man threw out his hand towards the Child, and he took it between his own.</p>
<p>“O beautiful Child, am I in the Light or the Darkness?”</p>
<p>“Thou art in the bosom of God, and in Him is no Darkness at all!”</p>
<p>“Do not fear!” pursued the Child, as the man made no answer. “For Love you have suffered—Love will never fail you—to the end—and there is no end!”</p>
<p>“It is true then,” said the man, “that the Child who spoke to the crowd was from Heaven?”</p>
<p>“It is true! Yet why do you wonder? Do you not know that the Father has ten legions of angels ready at any moment to save His children?”</p>
<p>“Yet He did not send!” said the blind man pitifully.</p>
<p>“Neither did He send to the Garden!”</p>
<p>“Forgive me !” cried the man. But the Child had gone, and only the feel of his warm hand remained.</p>
<p>The Captain still slept heavily, and Bottom Dog did not wake him.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>I beg you to reinstate him in your love. If you forgive the man, I forgive him, too; anything I had to forgive him has been forgiven in the presence of Christ for your sakes, in case Satan should take advantage of our position—for I know his manoeuvres!</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>The break-up of the meeting in the market place had been successful. Yet the people of Thorough were curiously dissatisfied. After all they had not heard the Message—and a sense of loss prevailed.</p>
<p>Moreover it is one thing to fling mud with a crowd, it is quite another to go home and think over what you have done.</p>
<p>Then there was that Child! Opinion was utterly divided. Some declared that an Angel from Heaven had spoken; while others said that those who said such a thing were mad.</p>
<p>Will Grierson was more dissatisfied than the rest. He had had thoroughly justifiable reasons for throwing those stones so accurately, and yet—</p>
<p>“They say that one of those fellows is blind!” a workman said in his hearing. “They’ve got a nurse and Sir Humphry Johnson, the great eye man, has been there. Hopeless!”</p>
<p>“Jolly lucky that no one knows who did it!” said another.</p>
<p>“Oh—that kind don’t prosecute! They love their enemies,” sneered another.</p>
<p>“Shut up!” said a young man, reddening. “We all did it!”</p>
<p>The first speaker stared at him questioningly.</p>
<p>“I say we all did it!” repeated the young man. “It was just our good luck that none of our stones hit—but we all made asses of ourselves!”</p>
<p>His “enemy” was blind! He had blinded a man in his rage!</p>
<p>For two days and nights Will Grierson suffered in silence.</p>
<p>Then he could endure himself no longer.</p>
<p>He walked out to the Castle, and went round to the back entrance.</p>
<p>“Is the gentleman who was blinded at the meeting still here?” he asked.</p>
<p>“Why yes,” said the kitchen maid.</p>
<p>“Would you be so good as to ask whether I may see him? My name is William Grierson.”</p>
<p>“I don’t know !” said the girl doubtfully.</p>
<p>“If you will find out, I shall be very grateful!” he said earnestly. “I have something particular I want to tell him.”</p>
<p>It was evidently not so easy to see his man as he had anticipated, but presently he was shown into a small waiting room, and the Captain came in to him.</p>
<p>“You wish to see my friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Muir, I understand?”</p>
<p>“Yes, sir, and by himself, please.”</p>
<p>“You are in trouble!” said the Captain quietly, “can I help you?”</p>
<p>“No you can’t, young man!” said the other sourly, “mind your own business!”</p>
<p>The Captain put out his hand.</p>
<p>“I’m sorry! I didn’t mean to intrude—only <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Muir is in a good deal of pain just now, and I thought that I could spare him; but if you really wish to see him, I don’t think he would wish you to go away disappointed.”</p>
<p>“It doesn’t matter!” said the man gloomily. “It was only that I know who flung them stones—he ought to know, so as he can take the law.”</p>
<p>The Captain’s face cleared.</p>
<p>“Oh—I see! But you know, none of us, and especially <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Muir, would dream of prosecuting. He was only saying today how thankful he was that he did not know who had done it!”</p>
<p>“But why?”</p>
<p>“Well, we took all risks when we held the meeting. You never heard of Jesus Christ or of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul prosecuting the people who took up stones to stone them, did you? That wouldn’t be playing the game!”</p>
<p>“You’re a dashed queer lot!” said the man, then he added irresolutely. “I wanted to tell him why I did it.”</p>
<p>“I can understand that—” began the Captain, as the secret dropped out.</p>
<p>“I can’t sleep night nor day!” the man burst out passionately. “I know why I did it, and the Devil told me it was a dashed good reason enougn, but now—the Devil always was a liar!”</p>
<p>“That’s true enough!” said the Captain with a sympathic enthusiasm. “Do you know, I am sure <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Muir would rather see you, if you will promise only to stay five minutes!”</p>
<p>“Three will about do it!” said the man. He was quivering with emotion.</p>
<p>“Come then!” said the other.</p>
<p>“Muir!” said the Captain as he entered the room, “a man of the name of Grierson wants to have a word with you. He is in trouble, and I thought you would rather see him. I told him he must only stay five minutes.”</p>
<p>Bottom Dog turned on his pillow and held out his hand.</p>
<p>The man stepped forward, and the Captain left the room.</p>
<p>“Oh, sir—I did it!” Grierson blurted out.</p>
<p>“Let me have your hand!” said Bottom Dog quietly.</p>
<p>“I can’t! You gentlemen don’t understand—”</p>
<p>“I’m no gentleman !” said Bottom Dog scornfully. “I was born in a cottage and brought up in a mine!”</p>
<p>“So was I!” gasped the man.</p>
<p>“I cannot find you!” said Bottom Dog, still feeling about with his hand.</p>
<p>The man, moved beyond endurance, gripped it tightly.</p>
<p>“That’s all right!” and Bottom Dog’s lips smiled.</p>
<p>“I just wanted to tell you why I did it, sir!”</p>
<p>“Chuck your ‘sir,’ ‘Mate’ is our word!”</p>
<p>“Don’t you see, sir, I’ve two sons—keen, fine lads, and they had never a thought but to do their duty, and off they went. And now, there’s one lying away out yonder—God knows—and the other is sitting by our fireside, being waited on hand and foot by the missis and me!”</p>
<p>“You mean that he is blind?”</p>
<p>“<em>Blind!</em> And I was fair mad when I heard tell in church that you lot were on the cursed enemy’s side—the side of them that had blinded my son! And I was mad that you hadn’t the pluck to go out like my lads, and that you should stand back and let them devils try to smash through and trample upon us! If I could have gone out, I’d have killed a score with my own right hand for him that’s gone, and I’d have blinded fifty for him that’s sitting by our fireside.”</p>
<p>“It’s a horrible feeling, I know it well!” said Bottom Dog sympathisingly.</p>
<p>“But they wouldn’t take me! They said I was too old, sir! And that is why I went for you! I wanted to do something to someone, and I was crazy with joy that I had the luck to hit, and now—I see!”</p>
<p>“What do you see?”</p>
<p>“I see that it’s a devil’s trick to get us poor fools to hit back! It only keeps the cursed business going on for ever!”</p>
<p>“That is it! You’ve got it, mate!”</p>
<p>“If you don’t hit back—then it’s a stopper—it dries up—”</p>
<p>“Right you are mate, only—if you don’t hit back—you must take up another Power—You must have a weapon in your hand! There’s hot fighting for us all, right to the end!”</p>
<p>“There’s a deal as wants to know what the Message was—” said the man not quite understanding.</p>
<p>“I am afraid the ladies have gone, and my friend has an engagement tomorrow—Thorough has missed its chance for this time, but some day, when I’m fit, you must get up a meeting for me!”</p>
<p>“But there’s something else I wanted to say!” said the man hurriedly. “You’ve a right to take the law on me, and I’ll do time and welcome. My name is William Grierson, and I live at number eleven—”</p>
<p>“Shut up! The idea of you dragging me into court! It would finish me clean off! But there is a kindness you might do me—”</p>
<p>“Any blessed thing you like to ask!”</p>
<p>“Then get back home, and tell your son from me, that he answered the call he heard, and that I answered the call I heard, and that we are both wounded in the service! The King knows all his privates, and all the difficulties, and if we’ve got off the track, He’ll understand. But there’s another service waiting for new recruits! The Prince of Darkness is trying to doom the world by his delusions, but the King of Light wants heralds to proclaim that Light is the only power to conquer Darkness. We blind chaps have a place in the ranks there!”</p>
<p>“I’ll tell him, right enough!” said the man, “but I’d go better satisfied if you’d say right out that you’ve forgiven me!”</p>
<p>“Why my dear man! How can I help forgiving, when I have been forgiven so much myself?”</p>
<p>“God bless you, sir.”</p>
<p>“I’ll not leave loose of this hand until you call me ‘mate!’”</p>
<p>“Mate, then, sir!” Bottom Dog laughed out.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXII</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Like as a Father pitieth his children.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Whoso is wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand the loving-kindness of the Lord.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>Alone once more, poor Bottom Dog felt the weakness descend upon him.</p>
<p>It was easy to show pluck when others were present. There was some object to be gained—a mission to help the trouble which he, by his condition, continually created.</p>
<p>It was when he was alone that the real darkness fell, and the Prince of Fear buffetted him.</p>
<p>What was it that Visionary Child had said? “For Love you have suffered, and Love will never fail you to the end—and there is no end!”</p>
<p>Ah, yes—Christ’s love—the length and breadth and the depth and height of it—passing knowledge!</p>
<p>And yet something hurt still. If some of this love—just a breath of it—could be incarnated into something human—</p>
<p>“My dear chap!” came the Captain’s cheerful voice. “I am awfully sorry to bother you again, but someone else wishes to see you.”</p>
<p>A frown crossed the patient’s face.</p>
<p>“Perhaps, if you don’t mind—if you could manage to choke him off for tonight, I should be glad. I don’t want to funk my duties, but my head—well, it’s splitting!”</p>
<p>“But that’s the difficulty. That’s where I am floored. I cannot lay violent hands on a woman. Never have and never mean to!”</p>
<p>The blood rushed to Bottom Dog’s face.</p>
<p>“It isn’t my mother—come after all?”</p>
<p>“No! But you’re hot. She’s a young woman. She has brought a message from your mother. She gave her name as Miss Davidson.”</p>
<p>The bed sank down and down, and the next thing Bottom Dog knew was that the Captain’s arm was under his head, and a glass of water was being held to his lips.</p>
<p>“That’s better!” said the Captain in a relieved tone, as he noted the signs of revival. He did not quite understand what had happened, but he wasn’t a fool and made a good guess.</p>
<p>“I’m all right,” whispered the sick man.</p>
<p>“I see you are, but I’m really not fit myself for frights like this! Now, lie still—there’s no earthly hurry. The young lady can wait!”</p>
<p>“But—you’ll let me see her?” The Captain noticed with a pang that he still used the familiar expression.</p>
<p>“Yes—she shall come. You’ll sleep better when you have seen her!”</p>
<p>A few minutes later the Captain left the room, and Bottom Dog listened to his retreating footsteps along the polished oak gallery.</p>
<p>Then there was silence. Yet he listened with feverish intensity. Yes—they were coming! A heavy tread—a light tread—nearer, nearer. They must be at the door. The handle turned. “God! That I might see her!” so the agony broke from him.</p>
<p>“Go right in, Miss Davidson.” Then he heard the door close.</p>
<p>There was a breathless silence. The man lay quivering, and the girl stood clenching her hands and staring at the form on the bed.</p>
<p>“Olive—you are in the room?”</p>
<p>It was a large room, and he heard her move. She was coming to him. He felt her kneeling towards the foot of the bed. He put out his hand. He couldn’t reach her.</p>
<p>“Jack!” she cried. “I can’t bear it! I called you a coward! I scorned you! I cast you off! And now—I have hurt you past all forgiveness!”</p>
<p>“Olive!” He was feeling after her. “Little girl.”</p>
<p>She moved up nearer and took his hand in hers and laid her cheek upon it.</p>
<p>“Don’t grieve!” he said tenderly. “It doesn’t matter.”</p>
<p>“But it does!” she sobbed. “It matters that I cannot see you—that is all!”</p>
<p>“You know that you can never possibly want to see me again!” she said, raising her head. “But I had to come, just to ask you to forgive me before—”</p>
<p>“Before what?” he asked falteringly.</p>
<p>“I am going to the Front—to the East.”</p>
<p>“That is splendid of you,” he said slowly.</p>
<p>“It isn’t!” she contradicted, in a tone he knew so well. “With some girls it would be splendid, but with me it isn’t! I was going for pride, and for scorn of you! I wanted to show you that I dared and that you daren’t! And, besides—”</p>
<p>“Besides what, little girl?”</p>
<p>“I was so miserable,” her cheek was down upon his hand again.</p>
<p>“Don’t be miserable for me!” he pleaded. “You see, it has turned out for the best. I’m done for, and I would not like to have spoiled your life.”</p>
<p>“It is spoiled!” She let go his hand. He had lost her. There was no sound save the gentle ticking of the clock, warning them that time passed.</p>
<p>The girl grew desperate, as the man remained silent. She could see his lips twitching below the bandages.</p>
<p>“Jack, promise me that when I come back, if you need me, you will let me come to you.”</p>
<p>“Olive!” he reached out after her, but she avoided him. “You don’t know what you are saying!”</p>
<p>“I do! I want to take back all my pride and cruelty. I want to be your wife—to comfort you and serve you and help you to bear it!”</p>
<p>“Olive! Have pity! Where are you? If you have taken back your words, we are still engaged!”</p>
<p>“Are we?” she let him have her hand, and he raised it to his lips.</p>
<p>Then the door opened and the Captain came noisily in.</p>
<p>“I say, Captain! There must be a waistcoat of mine hanging somewhere—can you find it for me?”</p>
<p>The Captain did his behest, and the invalid fumbled until he found the right pocket.</p>
<p>“Captain, bear witness that Miss Olive Davidson has agreed to be my wife!” He had found the once discarded ring, and was putting it on the girl’s finger.</p>
<p>“This is hot stuff!” gasped the Captain. “Was that the message from his mother, Miss Davidson?”</p>
<p>“Oh—I forgot it!” the girl gave a joyous laugh, yet the Captain saw the sparkle of unshed tears in her eyes.</p>
<p>“False pretences!” objected he. Then he added musingly—“Queer world, this!”</p>
<p>“Oh, my Father!” whispered the blind man, when he was once more alone. “Was this part of the meaning of the Child’s Message? Shall I ever distrust Thy loving kindness again?”</p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2 epub:type="title">
        Part <span epub type="z3998:roman">V</span>
</h2>
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Terrors shall make him afraid on every side; and shall scatter him to his feet.</p>
<p>His strength shall be hunger bitten, and destruction shall be ready at his side. His confidence shall be rooted out of his tent, and it shall bring him to the King of Terrors.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the arrow that flieth by day. Nor for the pestilence that walketh in darkness, nor for the destruction that wasteth at noonday.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>No wonder that terror had seized the Great City. The enemy had dared to ascend against them from above, and had shot down fire and death upon the innocent, and fierce indignation raged against the authorities whose business it was to offer protection.</p>
<p>The Child had seen the horror of it all, and had looked upon the destruction and upon the poor bodies of the slain, and he learned that even yet he could not understand. Why should the Sons of Fear still celebrate their victories?</p>
<p>As he passed into a crowded meeting, he was conscious of the electrical atmosphere, the suppressed excitement, the feverish tension, and he knew that the Sons of Fear were busily exploiting their victory, to bring about a fresh harvest of woe.</p>
<p>For the spirit of Fear resounded in every speech, and in the thunders of applause that greeted them.</p>
<p>The enemy had been doing diabolical things—promiscuously murdering men, women, and children. Indignation flamed to rage. There was but one way in war—one object in war. Men waged war to win, and whatever means meant victory, such means must be taken. It was sheer madness to rush down to ruin under the cowardly banner of a false scrupulosity.</p>
<p>“War!” exclaimed Sir Joshua Power, in his rich melodious voice, “is war! If it is to be waged at all, it must be waged to the knife. We must stick at nothing! We have conducted this war far too long with our gloves on! Let us fling our delusions to the wind and face facts!</p>
<p>“If they kill our women and children, we must kill their women and children. If they raid our cities and destroy our art treasures, we must raid their cities and destroy everything they value. If they destroy the homes of our people, we must destroy the homes of their people. In this hour of peril there remains no place for squeamish nonsense, for gentlemen—remember this—a proposition surely clear enough to every schoolboy—unless the enemy is to crush us, we must crush them. War is not a game. War means life or death. Whatever diabolical means the enemy takes—we must look to it that we are beforehand, and are not for ever lagging behind.</p>
<p>“Let us demand from our Government that they shall use any means known to them which will shorten this horror, and bring the enemy to our feet.</p>
<p>“Let us rouse the tiger blood of our great Empire! Let us call the millions of our dark-skinned countrymen to our aid. Let the fighting tribes of the world, graciously put at our disposal by Almighty God, come forth at the nation’s call.</p>
<p>“For the sake of our homes, our wives, our children, for the sake of all that is best and noblest—for the sake of the Peace of the world, it is necessary that we should win this war by any and every means under our hand, or—perish!”</p>
<p>Sir Joshua sat down amidst round after round of applause.</p>
<p>Michael Forward learned over and whispered:</p>
<p>“Excellently done! The thin edge accurately inserted. The spirit is all right! A clever touch about the dark tribes—tested the audience, yet kept the secret!”</p>
<p>Then another speaker rose, to talk on another theme. He was a rough, domineering personage, popular with the vulgar. “You know, gentlemen,” he said scoffingly, “there’s a beastly lot of nonsense talked by sentimental folk who keep their heads safely stuck in the sand. They say we don’t hate the enemy—Oh dear no—of course not! Now I don’t understand that proposition. I’m one of your straightforward men! I like to call things by their right names. Now that’s sheer idiocy or it’s a hypocritical lie! I’m not even against a thundering good lie, if I’ve any use for it, but I’m not ashamed to say—here and now—that I do hate the enemy—I would, if I could—(loud laughter)—clear him off the face of the earth. I say, that this nation from this time forward and for evermore, must have nothing to do with him or his. I would drive him from our land, neck and crop, refuse his goods, refuse him our goods, confiscate his property, repudiate our debts to him, kill his commerce—and if any one dares to marry him—well—God help her!</p>
<p>“Ah—you may laugh, but I tell you seriously, gentlemen, there will never be Peace in the world until this pestilence is rooted out!</p>
<p>“‘Wrong the wronger, till he render right!’ is a good old saying, but he never will render right! He is a poison through every current into which he tries to flow!</p>
<p>“And there’s another pestilence, gentlemen, of which I might put you on your guard.</p>
<p>“Just now we are infested by a plague of so-called Peace organisations—run by the enemy’s gold—which are blithering out infamous doctrines and quack remedies, which are calculated to drag us down under the foot of the foe! Search these people out! Rid our beloved country of them in God’s name—”</p>
<p>The Child slipped away. He had heard enough.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Yet I have left Me seven thousand, all the knees which have not bowed to Baal, and every mouth which hath not kissed him.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>It was still early, and the crowds in the streets were hurrying as quickly as they might, for the City was darkened by the Prince of Fear, and men stumbled uncertainly as they passed along.</p>
<p>The restaurants and theatres and places of entertainment were evidently in full swing, and they seemed to the Child to be out of harmony with the tragedy into which the world had been plunged. His heart was sore and he battled against the longing to return to the place of Light.</p>
<p>“If any man could be like Jesus Christ in this miserable world, he was the nearest we have yet discovered!” said a young girl, as she hung on the arm of a shabbily-clothed man with broken bootsoles.</p>
<p>“I left work and chanced them giving me the sack for cutting overtime!” said the girl. “If I starve from tomorrow, I’ll not miss paying him my last respects!”</p>
<p>The Child’s face suddenly lightened.</p>
<p>“I will pay him my last respects too!” he thought. “Perhaps he is one of the poor dreamers of Earth who has seen visions!”</p>
<p>So he followed the young people into a huge galleried hall, and sensitively understood that the atmosphere had changed.</p>
<p>“All men are Brothers!” hung in a banner behind the platform, and from the organ, solemn funeral music, rich with the promise of trimuph, throbbed out an inspiring welcome to the gathering audience.</p>
<p>The platform was crowded with men and women, suffering as the men and women below them were suffering. Yet there was no sense of despair or even discouragement. As the applause broke, speakers, one after another, paid their tribute to the Master who had left them. The Child thrilled with renewed hope, as he discovered by that which the assembled multitude admired, the way their faces were set.</p>
<p>“He was honest to his convictions! Brave to state them. Ready to face any storm! His courage rose high against fearful odds! And as for this war—this vile tornado of hate—it mocked his hopes, and in his physical weakness, the once strong man bowed and died!”</p>
<p>“He was a born rebel!” cried another passionately. “Out for all there was to get for those to whom it belonged!”</p>
<p>“Our Master never recognised defeat! Never shall I forget when he lost an election and the forces of reaction were howling their triumph! ‘Never mind lads!’ he said cheerfully, ‘there’s plenty of other work to be done, let’s get out and at it!’”</p>
<p>“Our Master was no superior person! He was never a boss. He was a servant of the people—one of themselves. Did he care for victory as a personal triumph? A victory to him only meant greater opportunity for greater service to those he loved so dearly. Was he out for honor, recognition, power? Never!</p>
<p>“And he was never too big to attend to little things! He would toil for a day over some woman’s tragedy, or sit by the fireside with the children about his knee. The more you knew him, the more your confidence deepened, and your faith in God and humanity strengthened.</p>
<p>“What did he care most about? The one ambition of his soul was to lift up those who were deepest down!</p>
<p>“And comrades! Our Master was uncorrupted and incorruptible!”</p>
<p>And the speaker waited until the heartbreaking applause torrented forth.</p>
<p>“Our Master didn’t fight men!” he went on more quietly. “He fought systems. He saw God in every man. And tonight—though we cannot see him, he would not have us mourn. He would have us strike the note of triumph, even in this hour of apparent defeat and darkness. As divinely inspired a leader of the people as ever Moses was in his day, he now calls to every one of us to rest neither day nor night in the fight of the faith, until this miserable system in which men, women and children toil and suffer and sin and perish shall be swept away!”</p>
<p>Then a woman rose.</p>
<p>“Comrades,” she began tenderly, “Our Master who has gone from us showed us new values—the kind of values Jesus Christ showed long ago which men spurned from them as sheer folly.</p>
<p>“Men will tell you that it is Hell to be poor. Our dead Master taught us that it was Hell to be rich while other people are poor.</p>
<p>“Our Master was indeed a rebel against false values. He never taught that you could gain good by appealing to self-interest. He despised the gains of oppression and made the self-seekers ashamed. As a prophet he taught the rich to be ashamed of their riches—and the skilled laborer ashamed not to throw in his lot with the unskilled.</p>
<p>“Was he perfect? No—our Master would never have counted himself perfect. He was not a world politician—he was a prophet—a seer of visions—and comrades—it seems to me at this hour, that it is prophets and not politicians we need.</p>
<p>“‘Where there is no vision the people perish!’”</p>
<p>The woman sat down and buried her face in her hands.</p>
<p>“Comrades!” said another speaker. “A strange hour is coming upon us—a testing hour! The chains of a damnable slavery may be rivetted upon us before we know it. If we must go down, let us go down with our flag flying!”</p>
<p>“And remember, Comrades,” added another, “That we are of all of one race—one blood—the children of one Father. Our Master cried out in his weakness to me when the doom fell—‘It is hard to begin all over again!’ But we are here to begin all over again! Let them crush Truth to earth as they dare, she will rise again!”</p>
<p>The Child slipped away, and as he reached the street he looked upward into a heaven of stars which no power of the earth could dim, and whispered:</p>
<p>“Oh, Christ God, I thank Thee! I am learning to understand.”</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things that are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>Sir Joshua Power had had a busy month in the Great City. In some respects he felt that his plans were prospering. Yet he had an uncomfortable sense that something, he did not know exactly what, was working against him.</p>
<p>Was this opposition seriously indicated by the vague word Pacifism, or was it something bigger and more disintegrating?</p>
<p>Immense support gathered round his declaration that Pacifism, as he understood it, was materialistic, self-seeking, cowardly, and that the only possible hope for an idealistic future lay in prosecuting the war to the bitter end—that is, to the utter destruction of the enemy, nationally, commercially and socially.</p>
<p>The “Bitter-enders,” as they were popularly called, gained a spontaneous backing, for could they not hold up to the public admiration the stupendous heroism and reckless selflessness of the heroes who had counted not their lives dear unto them, but who had gone forth to kill and die in the name of the great future?</p>
<p>From the standpoint that to win would be victory for righteousness and national stability, and to lose would be defeat, it was easy to accept the final advance.</p>
<p>Any means which would bring about victory must be for the uplift of the world.</p>
<p>Sir Joshua became the natural centre round which the extremists gathered. The cry rose in volume that the war was not being prosecuted with sufficient vigour—there were slack hands and weak hearts in the counsels of the nation.</p>
<p>What the whole civilised world wanted was a strong man who would dare to act strongly. It was intimated to Sir Joshua not once nor twice, not through one channel, but through a dozen cannels, that the nation was looking to him as that strong man.</p>
<p>And yet, notwithstanding such gratifying vindication of his contention, Sir Joshua was also aware that the general atmosphere in the nation was changing. The people, shocked into acquiescence, were beginning to refind themselves, and were moreover daring to speak out with increasing clarity. Obviously it would be necessary to strike at the earliest possible moment, while the public could still be counted upon.</p>
<p>Having run down into the country for a weekend, his first words after greeting his wife were:</p>
<p>“Well, my dear, and how is George?”</p>
<p>“I don’t quite know!” she said. “But I think he is really improving. At any rate there is a great change in him, which I am sure you will notice.”</p>
<p>“What sort of change?” Sir Joshua’s eyes brightened. If only George could be got round, his sky would indeed be glowing.</p>
<p>“Well—he goes out more. He is out riding now. And he has taken to the piano again, and he reads—reads a great deal.”</p>
<p>“That’s good—light stuff, I hope, to take his mind off the war?”</p>
<p>“Well—no,” she admitted. As a matter of fact, his reading seems to be principally religious—the New Testament and that kind of thing!”</p>
<p>Sir Joshua frowned.</p>
<p>“I don’t like that, Helen, it isn’t natural. Morbid—we must manage to stop that somehow. I hope the Preacher isn’t pestering him?”</p>
<p>“Oh, no!” and she smiled.</p>
<p>“Does he sleep?”</p>
<p>“Wonderfully. He has no difficulty in that direction now, and he is up early, just as in the old days.”</p>
<p>“We must keep that from the authorities, or they’ll be wanting him back!” said Sir Joshua with a smile.</p>
<p>“He must never go back!” said Lady Power quickly.</p>
<p>“Ah, well—of course that is quite natural for you to say, my dear, but—however—sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof, as the good people say.”</p>
<p>There was a comfortable hour before dinner, and Sir Joshua, frankly glad to be at home again, flung himself down in a deep-seated chair and lighted a cigar.</p>
<p>“But, my dear,” he said in an amused tone, “what is all this I hear at the office about a riot and a mob—a batch of traitors, and Lady Power coming to the rescue and bringing the lot back to the Castle? Liberty Hall here, I know to my cost, for all the drawing-room meetings, pageants, and fêtes that an inventive countryside can suggest, but surely we draw the line at traitors!”</p>
<p>“Who told you they were traitors?”</p>
<p>“Well—it seems that they are taking it upon themselves to stump the country, persuading any fools they happen to snare, that it is our bounden duty to lie down and lick the enemy’s boots!”</p>
<p>“There is always a good deal of rubbish floating about in Thorough,” she said lightly. “Talk about women! That office of yours is the biggest gossip shop in the county!”</p>
<p>“Admitted,” he laughed, “still, Morrison doesn’t lie more than he need, and he tells me that our best car has gone to be re-lined—also that there is a sick man installed here at this precise moment.”</p>
<p>“A blind man—yes. Your Thorough mob behaved outrageously—the cowards! The least I could do for the sheer honor of the town, was to see that he was nursed until fit to move. Besides—George has taken to him. He has done George all the good in the world. If I could know it by nothing else, I know it by his eyes. They are the old eyes come back.”</p>
<p>“Hum—” muttered her husband dubiously. “Well—I don’t suppose it matters exactly. You and I are above suspicion. Our opinions are too well known for anyone to confound us with these traitorous Peace fools.”</p>
<p>“What particular opinions do you mean?”</p>
<p>“Well, for one thing, that we made a criminal blunder in not being better prepared for war, and that now, there is only one way to bring Peace to the world.”</p>
<p>“And what is the only way?”</p>
<p>“Why—my dear—” and there was impatience in his tone, “it is obvious that our nation must prove itself strong enough to crush out the militarism of the enemy. Only when we can convince them by practical demonstration that it will never again be the remotest use for them to lift up their arms against us, shall we have World Peace and the security of our own interests.”</p>
<p>“Interests?” she raised her eyebrows—“we are not fighting for our own interests!”</p>
<p>“No—no—well, not when we are on platforms, my dear! Some platforms, that is—but we all know that every nation must secure her own interests—combined with her ideals of course—or she is lost!”</p>
<p>“I see—but Joshua, when is the happy moment coming when we shall be able to make this great demonstration? So far as I can judge, we are exactly as we were months ago, except for the blood and the treasure.”</p>
<p>He smiled. “Pessimistic tonight! But things are perhaps better than they appear to the public. We have not wasted our time in the Great City—that I can assure you. Wait one more week and—well you will notice developments!”</p>
<p>“What do you mean?” she said. He did not notice how restlessly she played with her hands.</p>
<p>“We shall have prepared the Last Weapon!” he answered her quietly.</p>
<p>“I don’t understand,” she breathed. The light was behind her, and he did not notice her whiteness.</p>
<p>“Walls have ears, and wives—well, Helen, I am not at liberty to tell even you. But I think I may say this much with confidence, that in a fortnight—a month at the outside, the war will be over.”</p>
<p>Her face lighted up with a sudden hope.</p>
<p>“They are talking of Peace?” she exclaimed.</p>
<p>“We shall talk of Peace!” he answered. “We shall have won the supreme triumph of securing Peace upon our own terms.”</p>
<p>He faced suddenly round.</p>
<p>“Why—what is it?” she exclaimed, startled.</p>
<p>“Oh—nothing,” he laughed out. “I only thought for a moment that we were being overheard. If this secret were to get out—but of course that is absurd—it can’t!”</p>
<p>“Joshua—tell me. What do you mean by your Last Weapon? What is this dreadful secret?”</p>
<p>He smiled into her eyes. “Dreadful? That is scarcely the word! It is the Last Weapon—the only way to bring Peace!” He tried to speak lightly, rather vexed with himself that he had said so much. “I think I will just run round the stables while the light lasts,” and he rose and left her.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>No man can serve two masters; either he will hate the one and love the other, or else he will stand by the one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and Mammon.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>The Minister rose from his knees. Tonight was to be a great night, and he had been thanking his Master for the revealing truth that He was a God of Battles. If God were not a God of Battles, then indeed his heart must have failed him.</p>
<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Matthew Waters was esteemed as something of a prophet in his generation, for he had been an inspiration to thousands—a light lifted up to deliver men from selfishness and greed, and to lead them into the way of love to Christ and service to man; and in his enthusiasm for his Master, he had called upon his nation, by writing and by speech, to cast aside their trust in the weapons of war, and to stand forth as pioneers of Peace, Goodwill, and Brotherhood—let the cost be what it might.</p>
<p>Therefore when the Prince of Fear set forth to delude the world to its undoing, he did not forget the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Matthew Waters.</p>
<p>Thus it came about that at the outbreak of war the Minister discovered that he had made a mistake—that he had misread his Master’s mind. It was clearly not possible in the first instance to cast out such awful evil as had broken forth, by the weapons of Christ alone. To rely on such weapons would lead to the crucifixion of everything holy that one loved and honored. The conflict might indeed be a spiritual one, but the spiritual forces of evil had incarnated themselves into flesh and blood. There was but one kind of power sufficient for these conditions. The Christ Himself had ordered an advance behind the banner of the Prince of Fear, under penalty of High Treason to Himself.</p>
<p>So hundreds of young men whom the Minister had baptised in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, went forth, inspired by his clarion call, nobly, willingly, and joyously, to take up the arms of flesh that they might do battle against the spirit forces of Darkness.</p>
<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters had counted the number of them proudly, had emblazoned their names upon his church walls, caused the children in the Sunday School to salute the Honour Roll as they passed, and had his own private list in his study, that he might remember each in passionate prayer, that they might be blessed and kept spotless from the world in their great mission.</p>
<p>But as the months passed the Minister wrestled in prayer with increasing fervor born of a bewildering doubt. For some inscrutable reason the fighting mission did not show any trace of Divine blessing, and indeed, some scorners said that the blessing was being vouchsafed to the enemy, or that the Almighty was, at the very most, standing aloof—letting men take their way.</p>
<p>So as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters looked round with anxious eyes to find direction through the tangled path, he came to the conclusion that God was only waiting to bless his country’s arms to victory, so soon as the people were prepared to put away their manifold sins and humble themselves in penitence before the throne of God.</p>
<p>But meanwhile, the arm of flesh must be strengthened, and a great meeting was to be held that night in the Church Hall to welcome one of the congregation who had returned home on leave, decorated with the Star of Honour.</p>
<p>The whole Church was excited, and absorbed in making the “welcome home” worthy of the occasion; and it was sincerely hoped that through this effort, the Church would win through to the honor of having sent the largest number of men into the field of any Church in the kingdom.</p>
<p>“Why, Harry! what a surprise!” exclaimed the Minister rapturously, as the door opened, and the young lieutenant came in upon him. “I feared I should not see you until the great occasion!”</p>
<p>Lieutenant Trueman lifted his shoulders, as he gripped his Minister’s hand. He was tall and strongly built, with deep-set eyes, a firm mouth and a square chin, and as he looked round the room, his eyes stayed on the list.</p>
<p>“Yes,” said the Minister, “yes—there they are—all of them. So many, poor boys, have passed Beyond. I have marked those with the Cross.”</p>
<p>The young man glanced down the list, and noted the men he remembered, who had fallen.</p>
<p>“Did you have a very bad time with your arm?” asked the Minister, as he motioned his guest to an easy chair.</p>
<p>“Not specially,” he said indifferently, “it bothered, the usual thing I suppose, until I got rid of it.”</p>
<p>“And your Star of Honour—may I look?”</p>
<p>“Oh, yes.”</p>
<p>“You’ll have a cigar?” asked the Minister, as after closely examining the decoration, he opened his case.</p>
<p>“I never refuse!” and the soldier’s wonderful grey eyes smiled. “Thanks—I can manage all right! I am quite expert now.”</p>
<p>“It is so delightful of you to have come in like this. I want to hear everything—as much as ever you can tell me!” and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters puffed away contentedly.</p>
<p>“Oh—I can talk, as soon as I get going,” he replied laconically, “so long as I don’t have to enlarge on how this thing came my way!” and he motioned towards his decoration. “Thousands ought to have had this reward for expert murder—I happen to be one of the lucky ones!”</p>
<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters frowned and looked at his visitor a trifle anxiously.</p>
<p>“It must be a wonderful feeling for you, Harry, to know that you have been able to serve your country so magnificently. How many—if it’s a fair question, did you account for?”</p>
<p>“I don’t know. I stood there for twelve hours—” and a queer smile played on his lips. “The peasants buried the corpses afterwards.”</p>
<p>“And half the time, I understand, your right arm was useless?”</p>
<p>“It was my luck to be double-handed—it came in.”</p>
<p>“A labor of Hercules!” commented the Minister.</p>
<p>“Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily as unto the Lord, in the Name of Jesus Christ,” said the officer drily.</p>
<p>Again the Minister frowned, but he said with assumed lightness:</p>
<p>“It is evident that if I am to get anything out of you, I shall have to cross-examine expertly!”</p>
<p>“No—I am quite prepared to give you your fill, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters. You deserve it! You see—I should never have gone if it had not been for you. My Star of Honour would shine more brightly on your black coat than on mine!”</p>
<p>“Ah, well—” said he, half gratified, yet still uncomfortable, “you will be amazed to see the enthusiasm there is in the Church. I may say that we practically think of and work for nothing else save war—whether to help the combatants or to heal the suffering. But this success of yours, will, through God’s blessing, be the very thing we have wanted to raise us to the last height of self-sacrifice!”</p>
<p>“I hope it will!” said the young man with a curious gravity. “Now then, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters, fire ahead! What do you want to know?”</p>
<p>“Oh, anything that you have seen yourself or heard. One longs so to realise all that our splendid boys are passing through! And then—well, one can pray better. I suppose it all felt a little uncongenial just at first?”</p>
<p>“Uncongenial?” The young soldier flicked the ashes from his cigar. “It was not perhaps quite the kind of life I had anticipated. I mean, life at the front has turned out differently from my old boyish visions. Do you remember, I was once absurd enough to think it would be my duty to suggest to the savage of Central Africa that to blow out his brother savage’s brains was not the best way to serve the Great Spirit—to say nothing of the method being stupid and—messy!</p>
<p>“However, one outgrows one’s youthful idealisms! Suppose I give you five little scenes—I rather want to rehearse them for this evening,” and he held his one hand. Then he looked round suddenly. “There is no one in the room beside ourselves?”</p>
<p>“No—” exclaimed the Minister, flushing. “That’s all right. Queer though—I had an impression—I have had the same impression out there!”</p>
<p>The Child listened intently as he stood by the window, but only the summer breeze knew he was there, as she swayed his robes gently.</p>
<p>“I remember,” he said, with a complete change of manner, “a certain day when we got into the enemy’s continuation trench. It was what you might call a canal of rot. The water was waist-deep—thick with filth and their dead. We managed to plunge through somehow, and mounted our guns, and then—didn’t we give them some lovely bursts? You should have seen the flags go up—all white ones I can tell you. Our artillery was simply fine—why, we lifted a hundred yards of their trenches at a time. We took a lot of prisoners, and as for the dead—well, nothing could have been more satisfactory. We were as chirpy as nightingales when we got back!</p>
<p>“How will that do for number one, tonight—something mild to start them?”</p>
<p>The Minister did not make any response. He was completely puzzled at the tone. He fancied uncomfortably that the officer was fooling him. Yet, no—that couldn’t be! That keen intensity of expression forbade the thought.</p>
<p>“Perhaps you’d like a charge next! They’ll all be keen to know what a charge feels like.</p>
<p>“I remember the first time ‘At the bayonet’ was shouted, I felt a horrible cold feeling shoot down my spine. The real thing had come! So we laughed out and let the madness have its way—the rage perfect, as one might call it. In a few minutes the field was thick with the enemy dead—our hands and bayonets were dripping blood. I felt hot spots of my brother’s lost life on my face—I tried to wipe it off with my bloody hand, but it stuck! There was a narrow stream of blood running along the barrel of my rifle.</p>
<p>“I needn’t tell you that it was hell let loose. Their Maxim fire was terrific and our men went down in scores—but we held them—for we went mad with the madness of wild beasts at bay. They fled in the end, crying for mercy—but there was none that day. I remember finding myself facing a great towering chap. He felt to me like Goliath. But he got seven inches of cold steel, I can tell you. The bodies were lying six feet deep, and the shrieks of the dying split the very air, and the wounded—many of them lay buried under the corpses. When we came back, we were horribly splashed with blood and dirt, but—it was grand—the heroic things the fellows did—in the Name of Jesus Christ.”</p>
<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters flung himself upright, as if about to speak, but his guest went on impetuously.</p>
<p>“No—don’t stop me! Let me give my third while I’m wound up. I might tell you of some of the towns we tried to clear of the enemy. We could watch the clouds of smoke rising—then we knew there was some other big building fired.</p>
<p>“Some of us grieved a bit to think of the innocent people who were killed and injured. But it couldn’t be helped. Buildings in war are only places to help or hinder the enemy. War is war, as Jesus Christ knew perfectly well, when He gave us the command to go.”</p>
<p>“That’s rather a poor incident, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters, so I’ll throw in a funny one! Our fellows were playing football, and the shells began getting the range, but nobody cared. I was umpiring for them, and I saw a shell burst in the road and bore a hole big enough to plant an oak—it didn’t burst—they don’t always. The second was luckier. It pitched clean into goal! The men roared, especially as the goal-keeper had decided earlier that the place was getting hot. But the third—it pitched into the next field, where a peasant was ploughing with an ancient horse and a rusty old plough. The horse had its hind leg blown off, and the peasant lost his arm and all the shoulder blade. The shell dug the grave for them both—mercifully.</p>
<p>“And now—Oh, yes—I remember. There was one time when the enemy had slunk underground in their dug-outs, and we timed our attack so rippingly, that when they emerged from their burrows, they found our infantry on top of them. That was our chance! Those who showed fight were bayoneted, but many, seeing we had trapped them, threw away their arms and surrendered. Some howled for mercy and offered us their watches, money, cigars—anything in order to buy their lives.</p>
<p>“We bayoneted an officer while he was telephoning, and another of our men was so keen that he killed four of them with a shovel as they were trying to escape down a trench. It is wonderful to think what weapons Jesus Christ offers us for His honor’s sake.</p>
<p>“But here’s the fifth. You should have seen what we called the Furies of the Night! Brown fellows who creep about stealthily like cats in the dark. They love to surprise the enemy in their trenches, and then—their fury works! There is no holding them in, for this is just the kind of warfare that delights them. They tell us that shooting the enemy is like cutting grain—their prowess is absolutely marvellous—only—they are insatiable—always asking when there will be another fight! And as for the trophies they bring in—it is a most gratifying result of our missionary labors in their land! Subscriptions to Missionary Societies should pour in!</p>
<p>“There now, that is five—but let’s just have a last one in case of an encore!</p>
<p>“I remember—we came into a wood—the trees were either felled or half-chopped through, and the ground was all muddy clay, in which every few yards or so was a pit several feet deep. It is nice for those at home to know what it looks like, and I may tell you that from end to end of this tangle of dead vegetation and mud there were heaped up thousands of the enemy. They had been lying there for months! There, I think that’s about as much as they’ll want!”</p>
<p>“But, my dear fellow,” exclaimed the Minister—“you are not going to give all that tonight?”</p>
<p>“Why not? I want to prove that I have been a good servant of Jesus Christ and followed His directions to the letter!”</p>
<p>Again the Minister was puzzled.</p>
<p>“But, it will be a mixed audience—” he began—</p>
<p>“Oh—there is nothing I can tell, that our women-heroines don’t know! If I began on the women—Heaven in the midst of Hell! And some of the parsons—plucky right up to the bayonets!”</p>
<p>“I am glad to hear that,” said the Minister, hoping he saw a ray in the darkness.</p>
<p>“Of course there are some experiences one would not tell—for instance—do you remember Neville—young Neville of the Christian Effort Band?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Well—as a matter of fact—he fell asleep at his post, and—I found him.”</p>
<p>The Minister remained anxiously silent.</p>
<p>“I was bound to report it. He was shot!”</p>
<p>“Never!”</p>
<p>“Oh, yes—” said the officer coolly, “when any man betrays his king and his fellows—he is bound to be shot. It is always dangerous to sleep on duty. The enemy takes us unawares, and the cause is betrayed.”</p>
<p>“What do you mean, Harry?” The Minister had gone very white. “I don’t understand you. It seems as though you had something in the back of your mind—as though you were saying all this at me rather than to me.”</p>
<p>The officer gave a laugh. “No, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters, I am only practising for tonight. But there is one point I should like your opinion upon. One day I happened to pass when they were about to shoot a decent old man for having obeyed Christ’s command to feed and shelter his enemies. The man appealed to me—and well—it was a little awkward. Of course, I could do nothing, could I?”</p>
<p>“You mean the man was a traitor?”</p>
<p>“That I can’t say. What I mean is that he evidently loved his enemies! Was that a crime?”</p>
<p>“What did you do?” asked the Minister, ignoring the question.</p>
<p>“I stood loyally by my commission to do all in the Name of Jesus Christ. I passed by on the other side, and afterwards—I had a vision.”</p>
<p>“Harry!”</p>
<p>“Your young men shall see visions and your old men shall dream dreams, you know!” he said lightly. “A Child Angel came to me, and asked me why I had done nothing to help. I suggested naturally that war was war. The Child did not seem satisfied, and he told me that I was calling Light, Darkness, and Darkness, Light, and that it was time I threw down the weapons of Darkness and raised the weapons of Light! And afterwards he took to prophesying that the hour would come when I should have the word and the Church at my feet—and that then I should make the great discovery of Darkness and Light. Funny, wasn’t it?”</p>
<p>“My dear Harry!”</p>
<p>The young soldier sprang up. “I must go now, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters. But we shall meet shortly, and I hope the affair will be a tremendous success!”</p>
<p>“Harry!” appealed the Minister, as he held his hand tightly—“You—you do not regret that you went?”</p>
<p>“Suppose you were Jesus Christ, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters, would you say to me ‘Well done!’?” But without waiting for a reply, he pulled his hand away and left the room.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Can Satan cast out Satan?</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Have nothing to do with the fruitless enterprises of the darkness; rather expose them.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>The Minister went to close the window. Not that he was chilly. He was restless and unnerved, and when he did reach it, he flung it open wider.</p>
<p>The telling remarks he had prepared for the evening had suddenly turned to tragic folly—and there was no time to make further preparation. What was wrong? Was Harry a little unbalanced because of all he had gone through? He had heard that some men from the front were suffering from nerve strain.</p>
<p>The way he ran off those stories—so quickly one after another! Really, the poor fellow must have had unusually unfortunate experiences.</p>
<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters stared out into his beautiful garden, so peacefully walled in from a rough world.</p>
<p>But he must really pull himself together! What was he to say tonight? He had meant to draw a beautiful comparison between the “Well done!” of an earthly king and the “Well done!” of the King of kings. Why had Harry asked him that question in such an extraordinary way?</p>
<p>And then, that strange story about the Child.</p>
<p>Visions in the Bible were necessary theological beliefs, but nowadays they were signs of a want of balance. Everyone except a few cranks admitted that we had lost the extreme spiritual sense.</p>
<p>And then he turned back into the room, and saw the Child standing there, crowned with Light, and with his wonderful blue eyes brimming with tears.</p>
<p>“Why do you weep, beautiful Child?” he stammered.</p>
<p>“If you do not weep yourself, you cannot understand why I should weep!”</p>
<p>And the Child kneeled and covered his face with his hands, and the Minister suddenly kneeled likewise.</p>
<p>“O, Christ God!” pleaded the Child, “lighten his darkness! Show him how Thy great Name is being blasphemed amongst the peoples! Show him that he is leading the young, the beautiful—Thy children—into the Darkness. Show him that the light he is carrying has been lighted by the Prince of Darkness—that it is a false light—and O, Christ God—tonight—show him that the Last Weapon is not Fear, but Love!”</p>
<p>The Child ceased, and presently he rose and laid his hand on the Minister’s arm and looked at him with eyes in which sorrow and love were mingled.</p>
<p>“What more can the Christ God do than He has done to show men the only way to Peace?” he pleaded with inexpressible yearning.</p>
<p>The Child was gone, and inadvertently the Minister looked at the clock. There was not a moment to lose. Already he could hear the military band which was on its way to do honor to the man whom the king had delighted to honor—and besides, Sir Joshua Power had asked to have a few words with him before the meeting started.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>The steps of his strength shall be straightened, and his own counsel shall cast him down. For he is cast into a net by his own foot, and he walketh into a snare.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>He shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of the world.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>The secret of the Last Weapon, the all-conquering Hellite, had been well kept, and in spite of much necessary consultation, with its resulting compromise, dear to the soul of the weak, the monopoly of Hellite had been secured.</p>
<p>The compromise consisted in the undertaking that the power was not to be actually used until the enemy had been given every fair opportunity of submitting to terms. Hellite was to be held poised in the steady hand of an uplifted arm, bright and prepared for flight.</p>
<p>The Great Church Ruler had earnestly pressed for this compromise, and when he was advised of the final decision, he retired with a sigh of relief, to prepare an appeal to Almighty God that the enemy might see light and truth and justice so clearly and humbly, that the Last Weapon might remain forever sheathed.</p>
<p>Further scruples had arisen in some minds as to how far any Government was justified in taking so momentous a step without consultation with the people. The scruple had been brushed aside. It had been found invariably impossible to consult the people over the exigencies of the war, and it was clearly impossible to make an exception regarding the use of Hellite, without giving away the stupendous secret.</p>
<p>But now at last all was prepared. The Press had been taken into the confidence of the Government, and it had been intimated to them that Sir Joshua Power would be making an important statement that night, utilising the occasion of a reception at the Fairfield Church Hall, in honor of a returned Star of Honour Lieutenant.</p>
<p>Sir Joshua had been so pressed with work, that he had recently seen but little of his wife and his son.</p>
<p>Perhaps he was not altogether sorry. They puzzled him. His wife had several times asked him exceedingly awkward questions, and he could see that she was worried. As for George, he simply could not make him out.</p>
<p>That affair about those absurd Pilgrims had been stupid, and he was thankful when his wife, feeling that she had fulfilled her duty, had let the blind man go to his own people.</p>
<p>However, no doubt everything would shake down all right when the stupendous crisis was passed, and he stood forth as the saviour of the world.</p>
<p>A shyness of his wife had tempted him to shirk telling her the truth personally. He persuaded himself that she would understand better if she heard it first in public, when by his oratory he brought the house down in a furor of approbation.</p>
<p>“My dear Helen,” he said casually, “I hope you and George will be able to attend Fairfield Church Hall tonight? We are to have a great time. A young Star of Honour man is to tell us his experiences, and I have a statement of some importance to make.”</p>
<p>She looked at him keenly. She knew him too well not to know that what he asked mattered.</p>
<p>“I wouldn’t press George,” she said quickly. “War discussion is still bad for him.”</p>
<p>“Not a bit, my dear. He has come round splendidly—I knew that he would. And to hear the brilliant exploits of this young officer will be just the thing for him! It will take away the nightmare feeling, don’t you know!”</p>
<p>“I don’t,” she said sharply. “It is perfect nonsense to suggest it, Joshua!”</p>
<p>“My dear Helen?” he remonstrated mildly. “What have I done? Why do you speak to me like that?”</p>
<p>“I don’t know, Joshua.” There was a slight apology in her tone. “But—do you remember how the wife of Pontius Pilate had a dream?”</p>
<p>“Of course—well?”</p>
<p>“I feel like Pontius Pilate’s wife! You are on the edge of doing something—I do not know what; but I implore you to have nothing to do with this Last Weapon—this new development of Darkness!”</p>
<p>The sudden passion in her tone was unnerving. It was necessary to pull himself together.</p>
<p>“My dear Helen!” and he smiled, “you evidently never ought to have married an armament specialist!”</p>
<p>“Perhaps it was stupid!” Her lip quivered. “I will come to your meeting.”</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>The God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>Harry Trueman was grateful that the Child had come to him in this last hour of pain.</p>
<p>“I told you once—far away from here—that the day would come when the World and the Church would lie at your feet, and that then you would know Darkness and Light!”</p>
<p>“And you told me,” breathed the young soldier, “to fling down the weapons of Darkness and take up the weapons of Light!”</p>
<p>“Yes—you did not understand then—but now you know!”</p>
<p>“Yes, now I know!” he answered more firmly.</p>
<p>“And tonight,” said the Child, “the Message will go forth to all the world: “How long halt ye between two thoughts? If the LORD be God, follow Him; but if Baal, then follow him!”</p>
<p>“I have already chosen, beautiful Child!” Yet the soldier’s brow was damp with the sweat of agony. “Can you not understand that in all good faith I took up my sword to die for Him, yet in His hour of need I denied Him?”</p>
<p>“He knows even that!” said the Child softly, “and you shall not, even yet, lack suffering for His sake.”</p>
<p>The Child was gone. The man turned off the lights, and went out for half an hour into the darkened streets.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>For thus said the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel:</p>
<p>“In quietness and in confidence shall be your strength: and ye would not. But ye said: No; for we will flee upon horses; therefore shall ye flee: and we will ride upon the swift; therefore shall they that pursue you be swift.</p>
<p>“One thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one; at the rebuke of five shall ye flee; till ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a mountain.”</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>The Church Hall was packed, and hundreds were turned away. An unusual sense that something was going to happen pervaded the place.</p>
<p>The reporters were sitting elbow to elbow, leaning across towards one another, whispering eagerly.</p>
<p>What was it?</p>
<p>“Peace!” someone said. Who said it?</p>
<p>A wild thrill of suppressed excitement set hearts beating agonisingly.</p>
<p>Peace! Could it be possible?</p>
<p>Peace was a word that had lost its meaning—People had forgotten it.</p>
<p>“And if Peace comes!” lamented the brokenhearted—“Peace will not bring them back!”</p>
<p>It was noticed that the Minister was very pale, and altogether unlike his usual confident self.</p>
<p>It was also noticed that when the meeting opened with a hymn to the Almighty, proclaiming confidence in God for National victory, and crying anathema upon the enemy, the young hero of the evening kneeled.</p>
<p>The Chairman’s words were spoken in such a suppressed voice that they could not be heard properly. It was understood that he would reserve what he had to say to the end of the meeting.</p>
<p>He thereupon called at once upon Sir Joshua Power, who had so honored the Church and their gallant young member by being present at the Welcome.</p>
<p>Sir Joshua received a tremendous ovation, and he accepted it with a frankly gratified expression of pleasure.</p>
<p>As soon as the tumult subsided, an anxious silence fell upon the audience, as Sir Joshua skillfully turned the reception to himself into compliment to the hero of the evening. Yet when he plunged into the real business of his speech his wife became aware that in reality he was not addressing the crowded gathering, nor even the reporters, but was making a great appeal to her.</p>
<p>In a few telling sentences, he reduced the spirit of excited hope to one of deep depression, as he frankly and unerringly emphasised the present appalling difficulties of the situation.</p>
<p>He dilated upon the grandeur of the sacrifices made by the nation, upon the heroisms of the soldiers, the courage of the ambulance, the endurance of the munition workers at home, and—in spite of all—upon their inability to get through. Not, of course, he urged, that there was the remotest fear of ultimate defeat—none whatever—but the Nation had to face the fact that the grip of a deadlock was upon them—a deadlock which must mean that millions upon millions of the youth of the world—of the youth nearest and dearest to them would still have to be sacrificed.</p>
<p>“And yet!” he cried, “it would be worthwhile that the whole of our race was swept away rather than that we should give place to injustice, unrighteousness and slavery!”</p>
<p>The audience gave him his reward in a thunderclap of applause—yet this was not surely what Sir Joshua had come to say?</p>
<p>He sipped some water, and then said in a quiet voice:</p>
<p>“But suppose—ladies and gentlemen, we have found the Last Weapon—what then?”</p>
<p>An electric shock swept through the people, as they waited breathlessly.</p>
<p>“Suppose we possess this Last Weapon? Suppose we are in a position to cut through this deadlock tomorrow?”</p>
<p>“Hush!” came from below—to still a feeble effort to clap.</p>
<p>“Suppose that because we hold this weapon, the enemy must choose Peace—our Peace—the Peace that will restore civilisation and secure liberty and righteousness—aye, the very Kingdom of God upon the Earth—or take the consequences?”</p>
<p>Then the applause burst—overwhelming—intoxicated. He put out his hand.</p>
<p>“Ladies and gentlemen, I see you understand. Yet what is this Last Weapon? It is a power—Hellite is its name, which will make an end forever of armaments, battleships, trenches, bleeding and mutilated sons, broken-hearted wives and mothers. All the ideals we have struggled after for generations may now be realised. We hold the power to unite the whole world in a Federation of Peace, because we alone and one other friendly Power hold the secret of a new Force which nothing on earth, on sea or in the air can withstand.</p>
<p>“Will you accept it? Will you use it? Will you go down on your knees and thank Almighty God who has delivered the enemy into our hands?”</p>
<p>Sir Joshua sat down and the people rose and cheered on and on madly. Men and women stared at each other bewildered. What did it all mean—exactly? Was the war over? Would the boys come home? The others need not go out! The business would not now be ruined! The little house need not be sold! The children’s training might be continued—a thousand ideas rushed through excited brains.</p>
<p>The telegraph boys darted in for their messages—some of the reporters left hurriedly.</p>
<p>But suddenly the audience realised that the man they had come to honor was standing waiting. His appearance was something of an anti-climax.</p>
<p>Yet as he took a step forward, pale, tall, distinguished looking—a soldier worth calling a soldier—with his sleeve pinned to his coat, and his Star of Honour upon his breast, the people let off their excitement in another wild storm of clapping.</p>
<p>He waited calmly at attention until the furor had ceased, then, after shooting one deprecating glance towards the chairman he began.</p>
<p>For half an hour he held his audience with vivid and dramatic presentations of scene upon scene, tragedy, comedy, horror, heroism, misery—he spared them nothing.</p>
<p>Those on the platform looked at one another uncomfortably. It was not good to let in the daylight so crudely. Lady Power glanced at her son anxiously, and saw that he was leaning forward listening intently.</p>
<p>Sir Joshua frowned and whispered something to the chairman, but the people sat spellbound.</p>
<p>The young soldier’s voice softened—trembled—and they listened all the more earnestly.</p>
<p>“Friends—Fellow-members of this Church, for it is to you alone that I now speak—what I have described to you is War.</p>
<p>“The Church has told her sons that their highest way of serving Jesus Christ at this time is to stand by the God of War. I believed what the Church told me. I went—and—I have been faithful.</p>
<p>“Once, as most of you know, I had other ambitions. I vowed to go out into the world to preach the good news that God so loved the world that He <em>gave</em>.</p>
<p>“Instead, I have acted upon the assumption that God so loved the world that He <em>slew</em>.</p>
<p>“I have taken it upon myself to despise the one Weapon He knew could alone prevail—I have taken up the other, and it has broken in my hand.</p>
<p>“Tonight you have heard of a Last Weapon. If I understand Sir Joshua aright, and I think I do, he is but leading us, the professed followers of Jesus Christ, forward to the logical outcome of the path we have persisted in following.</p>
<p>“There is no other outlet to that path, except the one proposed to you tonight.</p>
<p>“Only—I deny that Hellite is the Last Weapon. The Last Weapon was never forged by the Prince of Fear. The Last Weapon is the Power of Fearless Love—Love to the uttermost—a Love with which we ourselves have been loved, which we pour out upon our fellows and upon every circumstance of life which meets and threatens us. Christ’s Weapon is the only Weapon which can ever right the wrong, set the crooked straight, slay greed and heal the world.</p>
<p>“Christ’s Last Weapon is no weak reed which breaks and pierces the hand of those who trust to it.</p>
<p>“Friends! As I hope one day to stand before the judgment seat of Christ, I implore you to choose this day whom ye will serve.</p>
<p>“Will you strike with the Last Weapon of Darkness, offered you by the Prince of Fear, or will you strike with the Last Weapon of Love—the one weapon which casts out all Fear, the gift of gifts from the Father of all Mankind, Who gave His Son to prove its power?</p>
<p>“For myself, my war days are over. For the rest of my life, I go forth burdened with the knowledge that in the world’s supreme hour of need, I misunderstood my Captain’s orders and fought against Him. When He stood amidst the combatants, crowned with the agony of Love, I despised His power and cried with the rest:</p>
<p>“Not this man, but Barabbas!”</p>
<p>There was an attempt at applause from a few, but it died down almost instantaneously.</p>
<p>Then a man from the gallery shouted out in a mocking tone. “And you call yourself a soldier of the king? You traitor!”</p>
<p>“Tear off his Star! Tear off his uniform!” came from several parts of the hall.</p>
<p>“He daren’t have said all that, if he hadn’t got his discharge!” sneered another.</p>
<p>The officer flushed, started forward, then remained seated with an effort.</p>
<p>The chairman was rising anxiously, when a clear voice rang out from the platform to the furthest corner of the gallery.</p>
<p>“I have not got my discharge! Let me speak the truth too! The Last Weapon is not Destruction and Death—It is Love and Life! The Last enemy that shall be destroyed is Death! Love is the only deliverer from the bondage of Fear. I also have decided to stand by Jesus Christ—I also choose the winning side! I also refuse to fight and slay my brother!”</p>
<p>Sir Joshua turned deadly white.</p>
<p>In the hour of his triumph, his son had done—what?</p>
<p>The young officer stood quite still for a moment or two, as groans, cheers and counter-cheers greeted him. Then he stepped back and took his seat by the Lieutenant.</p>
<p>“Friends,” said the Minister tremulously, “I confess I am not clear what to say to you tonight. I fear that the powers of Heaven and Hell are working in this meeting, and I would rather not take either side—that is—I mean—Sir Joshua’s pronouncement has come as a great surprise, and perhaps as something of a shock to us all. I should like, however, to be quite clear on one point. I understand that there is no question of using this Hellite at present—that is, the enemy will be given full opportunity to agree to an honorable Peace first?”</p>
<p>Sir Joshua bowed his head—that was a part of the programme of which he did not approve, and which he had not intended to labor.</p>
<p>“And as for our beloved fellow-member, who has had it on his heart to speak to us as he has spoken, it is not for me to make any comment. I think I shall best meet the wishes of you all by pronouncing the benediction.</p>
<p>“The Grace of Our Lord Jesus Christ and the Love of God and the Fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all—Amen!”</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Woe to earth and sea! The Devil has descended to you in fierce anger, knowing that his time is short.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>“You know, George,” said Sir Joshua, as he and his son were alone together, “you really must be a little careful. I realise that you were excited tonight after the exceedingly melodramatic effort you had just heard; but if your words happen to be repeated in certain quarters, they may get you into trouble. Remember we are in a state of war.”</p>
<p>“I know, father,” said the young man. “I am going to the Colonel tomorrow to report myself.”</p>
<p>“You are going to break your oath?”</p>
<p>“I cannot keep it.”</p>
<p>“And I have lived to see this day?” said his father bitterly.</p>
<p>“And I, father, have also lived to see this day,” said the son. “I wonder—”</p>
<p>“Well?” George smiled deprecatingly.</p>
<p>“I wonder, father, which of us feels the most lonely?”</p>
<p>The reply was unexpected. It drew a sharp oath from Sir Joshua, as he rose.</p>
<p>He walked out through the glass doors into the frost-bound garden, and his wife heard him.</p>
<p>“Joshua!” she laid her hands on his arm.</p>
<p>“Well, my dear?” he struggled to keep his tone at least polite.</p>
<p>“Won’t you throw it away and lift the other one?” she pleaded. “I know it is the only way.”</p>
<p>He knew what she meant, and he put a hand on her arms. “The matter is out of my hands now,” he said with an attempt at reassurance, “and don’t let us quarrel over the thing. You have George on your side, surely that ought to satisfy you?”</p>
<p>She shivered violently.</p>
<p>“Come indoors! It is so cold and so—so dark out here.”</p>
<p>Sir Joshua sat long over the fire of flaming wood.</p>
<p>Perhaps he had slept.</p>
<p>At any rate he lifted his eyes and saw the Child standing at his side.</p>
<p>“Sir Joshua,” and the Child stretched out to him a sword of pure Light, “this is the Last Weapon—the Sword of Love. It is the only weapon that slays evil and heals the wound of the evildoer. Take it!”</p>
<p>“Child!” he stammered, “I do not understand its use!”</p>
<p>“Yet, take it!” pleaded the Child.</p>
<p>And suddenly a figure of Darkness thrust himself between Sir Joshua and the Child.</p>
<p>The man uttered a sharp cry. When he reopened his eyes the vision had passed.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Why do the nations rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?</p>
<p>The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and against His Anointed, saying</p>
<p>“Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.”</p>
<p>He that sitteth in the Heavens shall laugh; the Lord shall have them in derision!</p>
<p>Be wise now, therefore, O ye kings; be instructed, ye judges of the earth!</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>Next morning the papers were delivered and the Nation awoke.</p>
<p>An excitement prevailed beyond all bounds, increasing in intensity as men and women talked, argued, wondered, criticised, praised, condemned.</p>
<p>The war was practically over! The awful bloodshed would cease! No more homes would be wrecked! The Nation was victorious! The Last Weapon was secured—the enemy knew it—the world knew it. Righteousness had prevailed upon the earth. The Great Cause had triumphed—God Almighty had at last come down on the Right side.</p>
<p>But the Sons of Fear, in array for the final assault, had urged the one real criticism, and sent the doubt firing as a beacon flare through the land.</p>
<p>“Why wait?”</p>
<p>The question was asked breathlessly in the morning, and by mid-day it was the question of questions.</p>
<p>From the children in the streets, who shouted rhymes to a crushed enemy, to the great money centres, the fever ran.</p>
<p>It was monstrous to wait! What possible sense was there in talking about the righteousness of our Cause, our determination to fight to the last man and the last shilling, if now, when God Almighty had delivered the enemy into our hands, we held back—held back when by striking we could save not only our men but all our wealth?</p>
<p>Weakness! Traitorous doubt! Every moment we delayed, some of our noble sons were dying in the trenches! Thus the people argued and fumed. Never had there been such running to and fro, such hasty consultations, such hopeless disorganisation.</p>
<p>Great mass meetings must be instantly organised in every city, town, and village to force the Government to be a Government and to act.</p>
<p>The country was victorious, if only—Men and women went down on their knees and thanked God for the Last Weapon and then rushed forth to make sure that its use would not be mismanaged.</p>
<p>“But I don’t understand, Daddy!” said a little girl to her excited father. “Does it mean that we can kill every one of the wicked enemy, if they don’t do just what we want?”</p>
<p>“Don’t chatter for goodness sake, my dear child!” answered her father as he read on absorbedly.</p>
<p>“But, Daddy—what if they won’t?”</p>
<p>“They must! Get on with your breakfast.”</p>
<p>“But, Daddy—would we—if they had it?”</p>
<p>“Nancy! Don’t worry Daddy when he is reading!” broke in her mother.</p>
<p>And the tens of thousands of the religious teachers of the people, what did they think?</p>
<p>By the papers it was clear that the Great Church was standing by the Government—so was the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Theobald Rogers. There were enough of the Sons of Fear to visit every study.</p>
<p>“We could not go back in such a crisis—what would our people think of us?” so the subtle temptation crushed down the doubt.</p>
<p>Yet many, blinded by a new Light, rushed forth to see what they could do—as foolish virgins—who had run short of oil.</p>
<p>And the Pilgrims—Princess, Bottom Dog, Little One, Mother, the Captain, and the tens of thousands who believed as they believed, what of them?</p>
<p>With one mighty impulse they stood forth and proclaimed that this was the hour of Darkness and not the hour of Light.</p>
<p>Yet their voices were as voices crying in the wilderness, “Prepare ye the way of the Lord.”</p>
<p>“God is not mocked,” moaned the Child. &ldquo;That which a man soweth, that shall he also reap. He that soweth the wind must reap the tempest.”</p>
<p>By mid-day the posters came out with sharp protests.</p>
<p>“Why wait?” “Give them a taste!” “Why not strike now?”</p>
<p>The Great Church Ruler preached from the steps of the Cathedral—anxiously, urging moderation. He was to the people as one that dreamed.</p>
<p>The noted national prize-fighter, Fighting Sam, held a mass meeting in the centre of the City. The public temperature went up many degrees.</p>
<p>If it were still possible to raise it, the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Theobald Rogers might be given the honor.</p>
<p>He also made a great public utterance.</p>
<p>“Hear the words of Holy Writ!” he cried. “They come upon us in much pride and iniquity to destroy us and our wives and children and to spoil us; but we fight for our lives and our laws! Hear the very voice of God speaking!</p>
<p>“&lsquo;Put on the whole armour of God!’ Who will lead us onward? Countless unnamed heroes of the field of battle—now in the Land of the Slain, are looking searchingly into your faces, to see whether you dare to follow in the right path. Across the great void—do you not hear the call? Over yonder, in the trenches, there is a vast audience watching the drama. The curtain is rung up. The bugle rings out! Glory—manhood is at stake! Take care that you do not shrink!”</p>
<p>But in the workshops of the land the controversy over the use of the Last Weapon raged the hottest.</p>
<p>“Why wait!” “It’s devilry!” “Fight the Devil with something he’ll understand!” “It shall not be!” “Get out! see what Rogers says! And Fighting Sam!”</p>
<p>And the cry, spread by the Sons of Fear, dominated ever stronger and stronger.</p>
<p>The inside members of the Government met. Sir Joshua was called. Was it possible that the torch had been held rather too near the magazine?</p>
<p>The agony in the homes, the piteous craving for some unknown satisfaction had leaped forth uncontrollably in the burning desire for retaliation.</p>
<p>Personal recriminations did not help the position.</p>
<p>“If news from the enemy would but arrive,” said John Dissart. “They will not dare to wait much longer.”</p>
<p>And then a piece of news slipped the Censor and was rushed through the Great City.</p>
<p>The man Rotensen had been murdered in the open street.</p>
<p>He was the only man who knew the secret of Hellite, except Sir Joshua Power.</p>
<p>Spies! Traitors! The cry was enough.</p>
<p>The people left their work, swarmed into the streets, and surrounded the Government buildings.</p>
<p>“Why wait? Why not let them have it?” yelled the crowd. The police were helpless. Men and women fought with one another to get nearer, so that they might make their voices heard.</p>
<p>Detectives watched Sir Joshua with a fearful anxiety. He was the one man who could save the country. As the evening drew on the excitement increased to a wild mob rule.</p>
<p>Still there was no news from the enemy—no hint through any neutral Power that they had even realised their position.</p>
<p>The Inner Council adjourned for a hasty meal.</p>
<p>When it met again, the Chief Minister appeared as a broken man. Sir Joshua’s face was ashen.</p>
<p>News had come through—officially, or unofficially—who could tell, <em>that the enemy held the last weapon also</em>.</p>
<p>The rumor indicated that a fierce controversy was raging as to whether any grace should be allowed their enemies in which to consider terms. It was understood that there was a large party passionately advocating delay; but it was feared that the extremists would prevail.</p>
<p>Sir Joshua was called from the room.</p>
<p>A message had come in that two young officers had been badly mauled by the mob while trying to turn the popular clamor. One of them had been identified as Lieutenant Trueman, the new Star of Honour man, and it was greatly feared that the other was the only son of Sir Joshua Power.</p>
<p>They had been taken into the Great Military Hospital and neither of them were expected to live.</p>

<!--se:split-->
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIII</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>They shall look upon Me Whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn as one mourneth for his only son.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>And all kindreds of the Earth shall wail because of Him. Even so—Amen.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>And the Child fled to Paradise, and kneeled at the feet of the Christ God.</p>
<p>“O, Christ God! Can’st Thou not save, even now?”</p>
<p>“I have offered them My Last Weapon for more than nineteen hundred years. If they still refuse it, I have no other!” said the Christ God, as He drew the suffering Child to His breast.</p>
