<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>Wrath is cruelty, and anger is an overflowing.<br/>For Satan himself is also transformed into an angel of Light.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>“Yes, my Sons! Our work prospers. Day by day and night by night we shatter the image of the Unnameable One upon a thousand hills. We care not which side conquers! We only know that the army which is most expert in the use of our weapons must be the victor.</p>
			<p>“As a reward for faithful service, we have bound our weapons to the hands of mankind, and compelled them to cling to them with enthusiastic yet terrified devotion. Not the mightiest nation amongst them dares to let go⁠—dares to stretch forth a hand to the enemy, armed only with fearless Love!</p>
			<p>“Now and then, some heartbroken or conscience-stricken fool drops his arms with a cry of shame, but we see to it that he is torn to pieces by his fellows⁠—curse him!”</p>
			<p>And suddenly the black-robed figure of Despair leaped forward and flourished the banner of Death, amidst the wild cheers of the crowd.</p>
			<p>“And should they falter,” the Prince continued in a curiously intense voice, “we can ever spur them forward to their doom by instigating some fresh horror wrought by our weapons, which serves as a clarion call to young and old to spring to our banner in the Name of the Unnameable One.”</p>
			<p>And the Child saw that he of the crimson robe, Cruelty by name, stood forth with clenched hands and horrible gestures, that he also might receive his ovation of honor.</p>
			<p>“My children!” the Prince spoke in a low penetrating voice, “in very delusion, the sons of men arm themselves as a sign of their courage. In very truth, they arm themselves as a sign that they have faith alone in me, and none in the Unnameable One! So it ever will be, O my children, unless⁠—”</p>
			<p>His eyes roved about the Hall, and came to rest upon the spot where the Child stood. Whether he saw him or not, the Child could not tell, but suddenly the Prince’s eyes darted fire, and he broke out wildly:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Unless⁠—the secret of Love breaks forth and overwhelms us!”</p>
			<p>“There is possibility of that, O Prince?” broke in Despair, as he dropped to one knee.</p>
			<p>“The secret is working!” answered he, motioning his follower aside. “When men and women see the Light, they push us from them with startled eyes. Be on the alert! Wherever ye see signs of this spirit, crush and terrify it if ye can, and if not, calm it by whispered words of confidence in the righteousness of the cause. For, believe me! Should men win this spirit, fearless of all consequences, even as the Unnameable was fearless, <em>we</em> are lost! They will arise and scatter us and possess the Kingdom.</p>
			<p>“But the battle is still with us! These foes are yet without faith, and creep along the byways of the world, deluded by our whisperings that they have no power. In every nation such are longing to find their fellows. We must keep them apart at all costs. How ye deal with them, matters not. Ye may slay them with mockery, perplexity, diffidence, procrastination, national loyalty, family love, pride in our noblest victims⁠—doubt of the Unnameable One⁠—so long as ye hinder them from weakening the world’s grasp upon our weapons!</p>
			<p>“Today, the slaughter and ruin makes men but struggle after us the more desperately. Yet we know that everything they think they are fighting for is being destroyed, even as they fight! That is our triumph. That is the crown upon my brow, whilst His drops blood!</p>
			<p>“But now behold, we must bring forth our Last Weapon!” and the Prince gathered up the lightning darts from the dais of the throne.</p>
			<p>“From nation to nation ye must go, my Sons, urging that the hour is come when some new method of destruction must be brought forth which will achieve certain victory. Can ye but delude each nation to accept this Power which men will call Hellite, then is my triumph complete!</p>
			<p>“Hasten⁠—be diligent in my service, for should the peoples in their agony begin to cry to the Unnameable One in repentance for their sin⁠—should they appeal for the weapons of Almighty Love, then⁠—”</p>
			<p>
				<em>“When they thus cry, He will arise and scatter His foes, and destroy the oppressor of His people for ever!”</em>
			</p>
			<p>So the Child’s voice rang out fearlessly, and even as he cried, all saw him.</p>
			<p>Swiftly the Prince seized his lightning darts and flung them, one by one, at the Child.</p>
			<p>“The Weapons of Fear are powerless against Almighty Love!” cried the Child. “I also go down to Earth, I also teach men the use of the Last Weapon! In the Name of the Unnameable One, the Christ God⁠—”</p>
			<p>But even as the Child uttered the Name, he was alone in the Halls of Fear.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
