<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 19</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on edge.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The three girls crouched over the fire, talking together seriously. Two points still remained as mysteries.</p>
			<p>Who was that beautiful Child? Why had Lady Power, of all people, come to their rescue?</p>
			<p>Then there came a tap at the door, and Lady Power entered.</p>
			<p>The three jumped up, and Little One offered her the big chair, but she refused it and squatted down on a low seat in the chimney corner.</p>
			<p>“Well, foolish people!” she began mockingly, “I expect you have been amusing yourselves in trying to discover why I came to your rescue⁠—Lady Power, of all people!”</p>
			<p>“We had!” admitted the Princess.</p>
			<p>“That gown suits you, my dear!”</p>
			<p>The Princess’s Madonna-like beauty was exactly what Lady Power appreciated.</p>
			<p>“Doesn’t it!” exclaimed Little One. “You know, Lady Power, we have never seen her dressed up properly before⁠—Pilgrims don’t do that kind of thing⁠—though they love it, all the same!”</p>
			<p>“I see!” mused Lady Power, looking at Little One intently. “You all deserve, of course, imprisonment in the Castle dungeons! Your object in coming to Thorough is, I understand, to turn me and mine penniless into the streets! No⁠—don’t offer me complimentary lies! I should be sorry if either of you descended to a lie! You preach that the trade in armaments is of the devil, don’t you?”</p>
			<p>Her eyes twinkled, as she noticed their embarrassment.</p>
			<p>“Come, if you were not afraid of that mob, you are surely not afraid of one woman? What do you say, you poor disfigured child!” and she turned upon Little One.</p>
			<p>“Oh well, Lady Power, of course you are involved in the evil system, and⁠—</p>
			<p>“And?”</p>
			<p>“I am sorry!”</p>
			<p>“Very diplomatic! Then in your wisdom, do you consider it a crime to allow oneself to be involved in a system?”</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—I don’t know! That is what is so puzzling!”</p>
			<p>“Tell me, Child! What is the Message you would have given to those people, if they had not been so perfectly mad?”</p>
			<p>“Do ask the others⁠—they know better!” But Lady Power shook her head. “The others look too wise! I want a child’s answer.</p>
			<p>“Oh well⁠—we should have told them that all men are the children of One Father and that Our Father has forbidden His children to kill one another.”</p>
			<p>“Even if these same brothers and sisters would kill other brothers and sisters if they could?”</p>
			<p>“That is what is so difficult!” said the girl frankly, “but because one brother does a wicked thing, it doesn’t really help for another brother to do another wicked thing⁠—that only makes more wickedness in the world.”</p>
			<p>“But suppose a brother were going to do a wicked thing to a sister, and another brother could stop him doing that wicked thing, by doing what you call a wicked thing⁠—how then?”</p>
			<p>“That’s what I’ve thought and thought about, until I’m nearly crazy!” said the girl. “Only⁠—Lady Power⁠—you are talking as if the Father were not alive! We have just to obey⁠—as Jesus Christ obeyed. Jesus Christ was not a crank!”</p>
			<p>“Only He failed⁠—they crucified Him,” she said, looking keenly at the girl.</p>
			<p>“I know. He was crucified, but He didn’t fail! It is we who have failed! If all down the ages, men and women had been willing to love the world to the death, the world would have been saved long ago! And so⁠—we are all guilty of this war!”</p>
			<p>For a moment there was silence, then Little One broke out impetuously: “Lady Power! Wouldn’t you be proud to die, if that would teach the world that wholesale murder is not the way to Peace?”</p>
			<p>“Incorrigible! We don’t call war murder!”</p>
			<p>“Only it is, you know! War is the unjustest thing in the world!” Little One was losing her diffidence and her enthusiasm carried her headlong. “Nobody has a fair trial in war, and the innocent are robbed and hurt and killed, and other nations not in the quarrel suffer intolerably. And it isn’t even the righteous cause that wins! The cause that wins, is the cause that goes directest to the Devil for its methods⁠—Oh⁠—I beg your pardon!”</p>
			<p>“Quite unnecessary. You are getting clearer! It is refreshing to discover someone who believes in the Devil!”</p>
			<p>“I believe, Lady Power!” said the girl impressively, “that if the Devil could plot out a plan by which one nation could just press a button and wipe the other nation out⁠—there would be some nation that would do it⁠—they’d <em>have</em> to do it, in case the other one did it first!”</p>
			<p>Lady Power gave a short laugh.</p>
			<p>“Probably you are right! Go on!”</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—but that is only half the Message⁠—about killing one’s brother I mean! What we really want to do is to dispel the awful delusion, engineered by the Prince of Darkness and Fear, that there is no other way except his way! But there is! If they would only open their hearts to the Spirit of Love, and dare the Prince of Fear⁠—he would fly before the glory in their eyes. Princess! I have talked such a lot! Do recite that Buddha story, while I take breath!”</p>
			<p>The Princess smiled at Lady Power, and began in her perfectly modulated voice:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Once on the errands of his mercy bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Buddha, the holy and benevolent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Met a foul monster, huge and fierce of look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose awful voice the hills and forests shook;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O Son of Peace,” the giant cried, “thy fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is sealed at last, and love shall yield to hate⁠—”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The unarmed Buddha, looking with no trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fear or anger in the monster’s face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In pity said, “Poor fiend, even thee I love.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lo! as he spake, the sky-tall terror shrank</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To handbreadth size, the huge abhorrence sank</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the form and fashion of a dove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where the thunder of its rage was heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Circling above him sweetly sang the bird.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Hate hath no harm for love,” so ran the song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And Peace unweaponed conquers every wrong.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Of course you may argue, Lady Power, that the Monster might have chawed him up, and then⁠—there would have been no Buddha⁠—yes, there would though!”</p>
			<p>“And so my dear, you are setting your little person up to fight the Prince of Fear?”</p>
			<p>“Not setting myself up!” she remonstrated. “Only⁠—what an awful thing it will be if⁠—we are right! I simply can’t endure to think of that sometimes⁠—What all the nice people will do when they find out that it was a delusion! The people are being slaughtered by the million⁠—not by an earthquake, or something clean like that, but by one another! Every hour this war goes on the Body of Christ is being crucified again. Sometimes”⁠—she spoke dreamily⁠—“I seem to see that the marks on His hands and His feet and His brow and His side have turned blood-red again. And if we think these things, must we not speak? You yourself, Lady Power, would speak if you really thought you had received a Message of Love and Hope to a dying world. How could I ever forgive myself, if afterwards, when it is all over and the people wake up to sanity again and understand the folly of it all⁠—I had been afraid to offer Jesus Christ’s Message?”</p>
			<p>“Foolish young dreamer!” answered Lady Power softly.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Dreamer of dreams, we take the taunt with gladness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knowing that God, beyond the years we see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath wrought the dreams, that count with us for madness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the substance of the life to be.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The older woman did not reply immediately, but she settled herself very upright, as though she were nerving herself for an effort.</p>
			<p>“Still⁠—you dreamers⁠—have perhaps a little pity in your hearts for those of us who are tramping through the mud and the darkness, created⁠—if you will⁠—by your Prince of Fear?”</p>
			<p>“I haven’t been so horrible as to make you think we haven’t!” exclaimed Little One vaguely.</p>
			<p>“Children,” she said in a strangely moving tone. “Let me tell you the secret of my home, so that I may know whether you have any message for me and mine!</p>
			<p>“My only son is home from the front. He is not wounded. He is upstairs with a companion. Sometimes we think he is sane, and at others we are sure he is insane⁠—God knows the truth.</p>
			<p>“The great doctors who have visited him tell me he is merely nervous!</p>
			<p>“The only son of the armament king ought to have borne the front better. But he was always sensitive⁠—I remember when he was quite a little fellow⁠—but I needn’t trouble you with that!”</p>
			<p>She stooped and poked the fire restlessly.</p>
			<p>“When the call came, of course he went with the rest. Once he did say something to me about not being quite sure it was right to kill⁠—but I told him I should never be able to lift up my head if he did not do his share with the others.</p>
			<p>“He made no more protest. He trained and went out, and we were proud of him.</p>
			<p>“It happened in his first charge. They were rushing down hill⁠—or so we suppose, for George’s accounts vary⁠—when suddenly one of the enemy⁠—a boy we imagine⁠—threw away his bayonet, put his hands over his face and screamed for mercy.</p>
			<p>“My son understood the language well enough, but it was naturally impossible to stop the mad rush. He ran the lad through, and now, day and night, he gets no rest, but cries out that he is a murderer.</p>
			<p>“We have explained that he was not in the least to blame, because war is war, and he only did his duty. Nothing heals the wound, nor indeed touches the sore. I have tried religion. Our Preacher has been several times. He explains to George that he is absolutely guiltless of the crime⁠—I mean, he explains that there was no crime. He has told him that he ought to be proud that Jesus Christ stood by him and gave him strength to serve his country.</p>
			<p>“But nothing helps. George keeps repeating an absurd bit of doggerel he has picked up. Thousands of times he has said it, I believe.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Ef you take a sword and dror it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And go stick a feller through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Government ain’t to answer for it⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God will send the bill to you!</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Nothing now matters to me in life, but to bring back my son to his senses. It was when I saw the poster you had dared to put up, that I knew in a flash you were right.”</p>
			<p>“God cannot be so bankrupt that He finds it necessary to put the youth of the world to the torments of conscience in order to bring in His Kingdom. There is some other way, and God have mercy upon us until we find it,” said Princess.</p>
			<p>“A Colonel told me the other day, that we ought to take our Message off to the Eastland, where the men are being rushed by the battalion to destruction,” said Little One. “He said he had asked at least twenty brother officers if it could be possible that war was the way out; and they all said what you have said, Lady Power⁠—that there must be another way.”</p>
			<p>“Suppose, Little One, that I take you upstairs to see my son⁠—what would you tell him?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know!” said the girl fearfully. “I think though⁠—” she added bravely “that God would give me the Message!”</p>
			<p>“Come then,” said Lady Power, “if you are not too tired?”</p>
			<p>“Oh no,” said Little One nervously.</p>
			<p>As she followed Lady Power along the galleries, she prayed pitifully for help. What was this strange task her Father had given her to do? One of the others would have done it so much better. All she realised clearly was that the only possible medicine for such a wound must be the bare truth.</p>
			<p>They found the young officer playing chess with his companion, and he took no notice when his mother entered.</p>
			<p>“George, I have brought you a visitor,” and she motioned to the attendant to leave them alone.</p>
			<p>The officer rose, shook hands, and offered chairs to his visitors, but there was no welcome in his face.</p>
			<p>“I hope you don’t mind me looking so dreadfully hideous!” said Little One. “I got hurt accidentally⁠—”</p>
			<p>“She has brought a message for you, George,” said his mother in the deprecating tone she had recently learnt.</p>
			<p>“Who from?” he demanded, looking at the girl with scared eyes.</p>
			<p>“From the Father in Heaven,” she said quickly. Even yet she had no notion how she was to proceed.</p>
			<p>“Have you come to tell me that I am a hero, and that I only did my duty⁠—nobly?” he asked suspiciously.</p>
			<p>“Oh no!” she said simply, “I have come to tell you that you are a murderer.”</p>
			<p>Lady Power held her breath⁠—yet she need not have feared.</p>
			<p>A strange illumination dawned on the young man’s face.</p>
			<p>“Quick! Let me tell you about it!” he said excitedly.</p>
			<p>“It was tremendously steep⁠—and we were rushing down”⁠—he rose from his chair and began to demonstrate as he talked. “And he was panting up the hill⁠—such a boy⁠—and he threw down his arms and shrieked⁠—and⁠—it was too late. I cannot remember whether I stopped myself or⁠—I think not!” and he put his hand to his head. “I ran him through like this!” and he lunged forward. “We learnt with sacks and sawdust, but this was different⁠—my bayonet was wet⁠—and it stuck⁠—and he lay on the stones, and his helmet flew off⁠—he had curly hair and one of his front teeth was broken. The others drove on behind me. I stayed⁠—and then⁠—I am not quite sure.”</p>
			<p>“It was very dreadful,” said the girl, looking him in the eyes. “Sit down again, please. It was a great sin to kill your brother.”</p>
			<p>He laid his hand upon her arm, as she gently forced him back into his chair.</p>
			<p>Looking suspiciously at his mother, he whispered:</p>
			<p>“Everybody that comes into this room tells me I have done a great deed!”</p>
			<p>“It doesn’t matter what they say!” said the girl calmly. “It only really matters what Jesus Christ says.”</p>
			<p>“A murderer ought to be hanged!” he said doggedly.</p>
			<p>“Jesus Christ never said so. Are you sorry, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Power, that you killed your brother?”</p>
			<p>“Sorry!” he looked at her increduously. “I would die to bring him back⁠—I tried⁠—I leant over him⁠—I forget⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Don’t trouble to remember!” she said firmly. “Let us tell God that you are sorry.” She felt as though she were walking with a friend along the edge of a precipice and that at any moment she might plunge him down to destruction.</p>
			<p>“Do you know⁠—” he began confidently, “that a man once said:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Ef you take a sword and dror it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And go stick a feller through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Government ain’t to answer for it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God will send the bill to you!</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“That’s wrong,” said the girl, shaking her head at him.</p>
			<p>“Jesus Christ never sends us in bills we can’t pay. He pays Himself. When you killed your brother, you pierced the heart of Jesus Christ. Do you remember that a murderer was lifted up on a cross beside Jesus Christ and they died together? Come⁠—shall we kneel?”</p>
			<p>Still Lady Power stood motionless, aware that this girl was fighting a battle in the cause of her son’s sanity. Yet as the first words of prayer broke from Little One’s lips, she sank down on her knees behind the flowers.</p>
			<p>“Oh, merciful Father! Thy child has murdered a man! But Thou art pitiful and of tender mercy, and dost never turn any away who are sorry for their sin. Forgive Thy child because he has murdered his brother. Thou knowest how much he was to blame and how little he was to blame. Oh, Father! Thou knowest that each one of us is guilty of murder who has ever harboured an unforgiving thought against his brother or wished him evil. Do Thou now restore Thy son to health and strength, and may we all devote ourselves from this day forward to helping to slay the monster of war by the spirit of Love, so that we may indeed save the peoples lying helpless under the oppression of the Devil.</p>
			<p>“In the Name of Jesus Christ⁠—Amen!”</p>
			<p>They rose. The young man sat back in his chair and looked at her with a quieter expression.</p>
			<p>“It is good to know the truth,” he said.</p>
			<p>“I found out that killing was murder when I found out that hating was murder,” she said.</p>
			<p>“And were you afraid?”</p>
			<p>“Horribly! And then I found out that Jesus Christ loved to the uttermost⁠—me, you know! I can’t lift up my hand against anyone else, when He doesn’t!”</p>
			<p>“I am sorry you have had an accident,” he said anxiously.</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—I shall be all right!” she said brightly, as she rose.</p>
			<p>“Goodnight, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Power!”</p>
			<p>“Goodnight!” he said reluctantly.</p>
			<p>“Thank you, my dear,” said Lady Power, as she escorted her to her room.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
