<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 28</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>The steps of his strength shall be straightened, and his own counsel shall cast him down. For he is cast into a net by his own foot, and he walketh into a snare.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>He shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of the world.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The secret of the Last Weapon, the all-conquering Hellite, had been well kept, and in spite of much necessary consultation, with its resulting compromise, dear to the soul of the weak, the monopoly of Hellite had been secured.</p>
			<p>The compromise consisted in the undertaking that the power was not to be actually used until the enemy had been given every fair opportunity of submitting to terms. Hellite was to be held poised in the steady hand of an uplifted arm, bright and prepared for flight.</p>
			<p>The Great Church Ruler had earnestly pressed for this compromise, and when he was advised of the final decision, he retired with a sigh of relief, to prepare an appeal to Almighty God that the enemy might see light and truth and justice so clearly and humbly, that the Last Weapon might remain forever sheathed.</p>
			<p>Further scruples had arisen in some minds as to how far any Government was justified in taking so momentous a step without consultation with the people. The scruple had been brushed aside. It had been found invariably impossible to consult the people over the exigencies of the war, and it was clearly impossible to make an exception regarding the use of Hellite, without giving away the stupendous secret.</p>
			<p>But now at last all was prepared. The Press had been taken into the confidence of the Government, and it had been intimated to them that Sir Joshua Power would be making an important statement that night, utilising the occasion of a reception at the Fairfield Church Hall, in honor of a returned Star of Honour Lieutenant.</p>
			<p>Sir Joshua had been so pressed with work, that he had recently seen but little of his wife and his son.</p>
			<p>Perhaps he was not altogether sorry. They puzzled him. His wife had several times asked him exceedingly awkward questions, and he could see that she was worried. As for George, he simply could not make him out.</p>
			<p>That affair about those absurd Pilgrims had been stupid, and he was thankful when his wife, feeling that she had fulfilled her duty, had let the blind man go to his own people.</p>
			<p>However, no doubt everything would shake down all right when the stupendous crisis was passed, and he stood forth as the saviour of the world.</p>
			<p>A shyness of his wife had tempted him to shirk telling her the truth personally. He persuaded himself that she would understand better if she heard it first in public, when by his oratory he brought the house down in a furor of approbation.</p>
			<p>“My dear Helen,” he said casually, “I hope you and George will be able to attend Fairfield Church Hall tonight? We are to have a great time. A young Star of Honour man is to tell us his experiences, and I have a statement of some importance to make.”</p>
			<p>She looked at him keenly. She knew him too well not to know that what he asked mattered.</p>
			<p>“I wouldn’t press George,” she said quickly. “War discussion is still bad for him.”</p>
			<p>“Not a bit, my dear. He has come round splendidly⁠—I knew that he would. And to hear the brilliant exploits of this young officer will be just the thing for him! It will take away the nightmare feeling, don’t you know!”</p>
			<p>“I don’t,” she said sharply. “It is perfect nonsense to suggest it, Joshua!”</p>
			<p>“My dear Helen?” he remonstrated mildly. “What have I done? Why do you speak to me like that?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know, Joshua.” There was a slight apology in her tone. “But⁠—do you remember how the wife of Pontius Pilate had a dream?”</p>
			<p>“Of course⁠—well?”</p>
			<p>“I feel like Pontius Pilate’s wife! You are on the edge of doing something⁠—I do not know what; but I implore you to have nothing to do with this Last Weapon⁠—this new development of Darkness!”</p>
			<p>The sudden passion in her tone was unnerving. It was necessary to pull himself together.</p>
			<p>“My dear Helen!” and he smiled, “you evidently never ought to have married an armament specialist!”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps it was stupid!” Her lip quivered. “I will come to your meeting.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
