<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 13</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>For the Logos of God is a living thing, active and more cutting than any sword with double edge, penetrating to the very division of the soul and spirit, joints and marrow⁠—scrutinizing the very thoughts and conceptions of the heart. And no created thing is hidden from Him: all things lie open and exposed before the eyes of Him with Whom we have to reckon.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>And the Child stayed for a season amongst the Souls that had passed from the battlefields of earth, seeking some Message that he might deliver to the sons of men.</p>
			<p>“Have you no Message that I may take to earth?” he pleaded.</p>
			<p>“They would not receive our Message, though we rose from the dead!” answered a young Soul sadly.</p>
			<p>“They would refuse to believe that they also are naked, and ought to be ashamed and unutterably sorry!” said another.</p>
			<p>“Then ye do not ask for revenge?” asked the Child.</p>
			<p>“We want not revenge here, only forgiveness!” came the answer.</p>
			<p>“But do ye not wish others to rush into the battle to take your places⁠—to carry forward the great task ye undertook?”</p>
			<p>“Child!” and a Soul put forth his arms beseechingly, “We would have them shoulder the task which we undertook! But tell them that we have failed⁠—that they also will fail if they follow our footsteps. Tell them, as they honor their King, to have faith in His weapons and put themselves under His command!”</p>
			<p>“And tell them,” urged another Soul, “that the cloud of witnesses above, has no pleasure in watching Conscripts of Fear thrust at each other’s hearts, in obedience to the dictates of the Prince of Darkness!”</p>
			<p>“And tell them,” urged another Soul, “To cast off the weight of their world-armour, and put on the armour of Light! Tell them to run the course fearlessly, untrammeled by the snare of darkness, shielded only by Faith in God and their fellows⁠—and with eyes fixed only upon the Christ God, the pioneer in the race!”</p>
			<p>“And tell the prophets in the lands where you go, that they are, one and all leading the peoples in the way of Cain, because they have forgotten to keep themselves in the Love of God, and have cast from them the only weapon which can never fail!”</p>
			<p>“I will tell them!” said the Child.</p>
			<p>And the Souls of the slain kneeled in prayer that men might hear the messages they had sent.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
