<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 32</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-32" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>Why do the nations rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?</p>
					<p>The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and against His Anointed, saying</p>
					<p>“Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.”</p>
					<p>He that sitteth in the Heavens shall laugh; the Lord shall have them in derision!</p>
					<p>Be wise now, therefore, O ye kings; be instructed, ye judges of the earth!</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>Next morning the papers were delivered and the Nation awoke.</p>
			<p>An excitement prevailed beyond all bounds, increasing in intensity as men and women talked, argued, wondered, criticised, praised, condemned.</p>
			<p>The war was practically over! The awful bloodshed would cease! No more homes would be wrecked! The Nation was victorious! The Last Weapon was secured⁠—the enemy knew it⁠—the world knew it. Righteousness had prevailed upon the earth. The Great Cause had triumphed⁠—God Almighty had at last come down on the Right side.</p>
			<p>But the Sons of Fear, in array for the final assault, had urged the one real criticism, and sent the doubt firing as a beacon flare through the land.</p>
			<p>“Why wait?”</p>
			<p>The question was asked breathlessly in the morning, and by midday it was the question of questions.</p>
			<p>From the children in the streets, who shouted rhymes to a crushed enemy, to the great money centres, the fever ran.</p>
			<p>It was monstrous to wait! What possible sense was there in talking about the righteousness of our Cause, our determination to fight to the last man and the last shilling, if now, when God Almighty had delivered the enemy into our hands, we held back⁠—held back when by striking we could save not only our men but all our wealth?</p>
			<p>Weakness! Traitorous doubt! Every moment we delayed, some of our noble sons were dying in the trenches! Thus the people argued and fumed. Never had there been such running to and fro, such hasty consultations, such hopeless disorganisation.</p>
			<p>Great mass meetings must be instantly organised in every city, town, and village to force the Government to be a Government and to act.</p>
			<p>The country was victorious, if only⁠—Men and women went down on their knees and thanked God for the Last Weapon and then rushed forth to make sure that its use would not be mismanaged.</p>
			<p>“But I don’t understand, Daddy!” said a little girl to her excited father. “Does it mean that we can kill every one of the wicked enemy, if they don’t do just what we want?”</p>
			<p>“Don’t chatter for goodness sake, my dear child!” answered her father as he read on absorbedly.</p>
			<p>“But, Daddy⁠—what if they won’t?”</p>
			<p>“They must! Get on with your breakfast.”</p>
			<p>“But, Daddy⁠—would we⁠—if they had it?”</p>
			<p>“Nancy! Don’t worry Daddy when he is reading!” broke in her mother.</p>
			<p>And the tens of thousands of the religious teachers of the people, what did they think?</p>
			<p>By the papers it was clear that the Great Church was standing by the Government⁠—so was the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Theobald Rogers. There were enough of the Sons of Fear to visit every study.</p>
			<p>“We could not go back in such a crisis⁠—what would our people think of us?” so the subtle temptation crushed down the doubt.</p>
			<p>Yet many, blinded by a new Light, rushed forth to see what they could do⁠—as foolish virgins⁠—who had run short of oil.</p>
			<p>And the Pilgrims⁠—Princess, Bottom Dog, Little One, Mother, the Captain, and the tens of thousands who believed as they believed, what of them?</p>
			<p>With one mighty impulse they stood forth and proclaimed that this was the hour of Darkness and not the hour of Light.</p>
			<p>Yet their voices were as voices crying in the wilderness, “Prepare ye the way of the Lord.”</p>
			<p>“God is not mocked,” moaned the Child. “That which a man soweth, that shall he also reap. He that soweth the wind must reap the tempest.”</p>
			<p>By midday the posters came out with sharp protests.</p>
			<p>“Why wait?” “Give them a taste!” “Why not strike now?”</p>
			<p>The Great Church Ruler preached from the steps of the Cathedral⁠—anxiously, urging moderation. He was to the people as one that dreamed.</p>
			<p>The noted national prizefighter, Fighting Sam, held a mass meeting in the centre of the City. The public temperature went up many degrees.</p>
			<p>If it were still possible to raise it, the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Theobald Rogers might be given the honor.</p>
			<p>He also made a great public utterance.</p>
			<p>“Hear the words of Holy Writ!” he cried. “They come upon us in much pride and iniquity to destroy us and our wives and children and to spoil us; but we fight for our lives and our laws! Hear the very voice of God speaking!</p>
			<p>“ ‘Put on the whole armour of God!’ Who will lead us onward? Countless unnamed heroes of the field of battle⁠—now in the Land of the Slain, are looking searchingly into your faces, to see whether you dare to follow in the right path. Across the great void⁠—do you not hear the call? Over yonder, in the trenches, there is a vast audience watching the drama. The curtain is rung up. The bugle rings out! Glory⁠—manhood is at stake! Take care that you do not shrink!”</p>
			<p>But in the workshops of the land the controversy over the use of the Last Weapon raged the hottest.</p>
			<p>“Why wait!” “It’s devilry!” “Fight the Devil with something he’ll understand!” “It shall not be!” “Get out! see what Rogers says! And Fighting Sam!”</p>
			<p>And the cry, spread by the Sons of Fear, dominated ever stronger and stronger.</p>
			<p>The inside members of the Government met. Sir Joshua was called. Was it possible that the torch had been held rather too near the magazine?</p>
			<p>The agony in the homes, the piteous craving for some unknown satisfaction had leaped forth uncontrollably in the burning desire for retaliation.</p>
			<p>Personal recriminations did not help the position.</p>
			<p>“If news from the enemy would but arrive,” said John Dissart. “They will not dare to wait much longer.”</p>
			<p>And then a piece of news slipped the Censor and was rushed through the Great City.</p>
			<p>The man Rotensen had been murdered in the open street.</p>
			<p>He was the only man who knew the secret of Hellite, except Sir Joshua Power.</p>
			<p>Spies! Traitors! The cry was enough.</p>
			<p>The people left their work, swarmed into the streets, and surrounded the Government buildings.</p>
			<p>“Why wait? Why not let them have it?” yelled the crowd. The police were helpless. Men and women fought with one another to get nearer, so that they might make their voices heard.</p>
			<p>Detectives watched Sir Joshua with a fearful anxiety. He was the one man who could save the country. As the evening drew on the excitement increased to a wild mob rule.</p>
			<p>Still there was no news from the enemy⁠—no hint through any neutral Power that they had even realised their position.</p>
			<p>The Inner Council adjourned for a hasty meal.</p>
			<p>When it met again, the Chief Minister appeared as a broken man. Sir Joshua’s face was ashen.</p>
			<p>News had come through⁠—officially, or unofficially⁠—who could tell, <em>that the enemy held the last weapon also</em>.</p>
			<p>The rumor indicated that a fierce controversy was raging as to whether any grace should be allowed their enemies in which to consider terms. It was understood that there was a large party passionately advocating delay; but it was feared that the extremists would prevail.</p>
			<p>Sir Joshua was called from the room.</p>
			<p>A message had come in that two young officers had been badly mauled by the mob while trying to turn the popular clamor. One of them had been identified as Lieutenant Trueman, the new Star of Honour man, and it was greatly feared that the other was the only son of Sir Joshua Power.</p>
			<p>They had been taken into the Great Military Hospital and neither of them were expected to live.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
