<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>He was a slayer of men from the very beginning, and he has no place in the Truth, because there is no Truth in him. When he tells lies, he is expressing his own nature, for he is a liar and the father of lies.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>And as the Child entered the Halls of Fear, he quivered shrinkingly, under a strange benumbing oppression.</p>
			<p>A leaden horror, heavy as an ocean of darkness, descended upon him, and panting for breath, he sank upon his knees and buried his face in his hands.</p>
			<p>As he kneeled, he understood Fear, and perceived that the Spirit of Love cannot breathe its atmosphere.</p>
			<p>“O merciful Christ God!” he groaned.</p>
			<p>“Hast thou forgotten so soon that thou art crowned with the Sign of the Pierced Hand?” whispered a voice reprovingly.</p>
			<p>The Child leaped to his feet, and threw back the burden of Fear, as a strong swimmer dashes the sea from his brow, and lifting his eyes towards the massing darkness, behold, his face was full of light.</p>
			<p>And all around him, there was the sound of tramping feet and the clamor of voices, and a wild din of music that shrivelled the soul: for from all points, a mighty throng was surging through the dimness of the outer halls, bound for the innermost centre of all, and the Child, invisible, passed onward with them, knowing that this was his way.</p>
			<p>He noticed that the dark visaged beings about him were richly clad in garments which were stained and torn. They were jewelled with gems which bore no light, and on each forehead was a star which did not shine. On all faces there was pride and beauty and eager desire after something ever out of reach, and each eye was darkened with the furtive look of eternal vigilance, for none trusted his neighbour, lest any should snatch from him the treasure he bore.</p>
			<p>The Child saw that the innermost Hall was so vast that its sable columns were lost in the grey distance, and when, suddenly, the music ceased, the noise of the trampling feet was stilled, and a restless silence hovered, as the mist-waves wreathed and struck icily about the faces of the massed multitudes, for all looked towards the throne, still canopied in darkness.</p>
			<p>A flash of light⁠—glorious as the Morning in his strength. A roar of fiercest greeting, and the Child found himself standing alone amidst the beings who threw themselves upon their faces.</p>
			<p>The Prince of Fear had ascended his throne, strong in limb, wonderful in countenance, clothed with radiant mail, and bearing in his right hand the lightning shafts which none beneath his sway may withstand.</p>
			<p>The Child saw that the star upon his forehead did not shine, and in spite of the pride in his bearing, he read resentful terror lurking in his eyes. Gazing spell-bound, he became aware that two other figures, one clothed in black and the other in crimson, advanced behind the Prince and stood at attention.</p>
			<p>The Prince regarded the motionless throng with an expression of disdainful and cruel mockery; then he spoke out in a marvellous voice of echoing splendour.</p>
			<p>“Rise up, ye Sons of Fear! Is not this the hour of our triumph?”</p>
			<p>Instantly the multitudes leaped to their feet, and yelled forth savage howls of passionate devotion, and the Prince’s whole aspect changed to one of gracious and flattering intimacy, as he stepped forward and flung his lightning shafts down at his feet.</p>
			<p>“Eternal triumph to the Prince of Fear!” rolled in a thunder peal through the halls.</p>
			<p>The Prince smiled alluringly, and lifted his hand for silence.</p>
			<p>“Ye have done well, my Sons!” he cried, “but ye must do better. Our time is shortening, the crisis is advancing upon us. Our wise strategy has, so far, been overwhelmingly successful, but beware! At any hour, that other Force, at present crushed back and despised, may arise, as an inspiration to men to pluck up heart to bring ruin to our last and most stupendous endeavour! Let me⁠—” and the Prince clenched an outstretched hand⁠—“remind you of the source of our power.</p>
			<p>“Behold me, the Prince of Fear! By Fear, I bind you, my faithful Sons in an eternal bondage! By Fear I bind men to follow me with passionate loyalty, in my never-dying conflict for world-authority with the Unnameable One.</p>
			<p>“Fools that men are!” and the Prince laughed triumphantly. “Deluded to their own undoing! We have taught them to doubt the secret of their own power, and thus⁠—we reign!</p>
			<p>“Remember ye not, how the Unnameable One Himself once descended to Earth, that He might wrest my weapons out of their hands? Yet men clutched them the tighter, and because He refused to use them, they hung Him up to the scorn and derision of the world!</p>
			<p>“So today, we hide the Truth from men, but in the Halls of Fear, we can sport with the dangerous secret!</p>
			<p>“For behold! All evil⁠—every evil for which we stand, is conquerable by Love alone.</p>
			<p>“Love is Fearless, greedless, selfless. Love links man to man and casts down the barriers of nationality, class, and race, which we have spent ourselves in building up from the beginning. Perfect Love is invincible.</p>
			<p>“But men do not yet know Perfect Love. In this hour of their terror, we let men talk of Love, admire Love, worship Love, even as we thrust our weapons into their hands to fight on behalf of Love! We care not that men mock at Fear, hate Fear, scorn Fear, fear Fear, so long as they cling to the weapons of Fear as their only salvation!”</p>
			<p>Wild applause greeted the mocking sally, and the dark figures behind the throne stepped out boldly to the right and left of their Prince.</p>
			<p>“Yet remember, my faithful Sons, it is but poor warcraft to underrate the enemy.</p>
			<p>“Though the Unnameable One went under, scorned as a traitor to His country, He left behind Him a cursed seed of rebellion against my authority.</p>
			<p>“Love, breeding fellowship, co-operation, goodwill⁠—in fact, all the principles we hate, has been working amongst men for long centuries, usurping our kingdom, wherever men have torn aside the veil which we have taught them to weave between themselves and the Unnameable One.</p>
			<p>“The rent is widening⁠—the cursed Light is shining through. That is why it has been necessary to make haste!</p>
			<p>“Even a year ago, we feared that our task was beyond our power. But behold, you, my Sons, have gone to and fro on the earth, whispering ambition, ease, suspicion, greed, terror, revenge, honor, self-sacrifice⁠—love, even as you glorified our weapons which we had taught mankind to forge. What matter that some were eager, and some reluctant! They are all conscripts to our service!</p>
			<p>“We had indeed wondered whether the followers of the Unnameable One would stand out and trouble our hosts; but it is amongst these that we have achieved our most significant success, for have we not captured the spirit of highest human Love and noblest devotion to the Unnameable One, and bound it captive to the Prince of Fear?</p>
			<p>“Behold now, the loyalty of these subjects to their King!</p>
			<p>“He has commanded them to overcome all evil with good!</p>
			<p>“We have whispered ‘Folly!’ and they have believed.</p>
			<p>“He has told them to love their enemies. We have urged, that to slay their enemies is to die for the Unnameable One!</p>
			<p>“He has warned them that if they forgive not men their trespasses, neither will He forgive them. We have sent them by millions to their knees to pray that our weapons may prosper in His service!</p>
			<p>“He has told them that He cannot hear, so long as their hands are full of blood. We have persuaded them. to offer up their brother’s blood as a holy sacrifice in the name of Love!</p>
			<p>“He has told them that a tree is known by its fruits. We tell them that the poison-fruit they now see, is but ripening into a heavenly fruit for the healing of the nations!</p>
			<p>“He has told them that the Makers of Peace are blessed. We have roused His followers in all nations to brand the Makers of Peace as traitors to their fellows, and to proclaim, even unto the dark places of the earth, that only by obedience to me, can the Prince of Peace come into His Kingdom!</p>
			<p>“He has told them that the poor are blessed. We have warned them that the poor can only be blessed through the domination of the mighty!</p>
			<p>“He has forbidden them to lay up treasures for themselves on earth. We have taught them that their only security for a life worth living comes through possession!</p>
			<p>“He has told them that the chiefest amongst them is he who serves. We have told them that the only hope for any nation is to dominate.</p>
			<p>“He has roused the youth of all nations to an enthusiasm for righteousness. We have prostituted this enthusiasm, by alluring them to use the methods of wild beasts⁠—devils if you will! And thousands⁠—perhaps millions of them⁠—the young fools⁠—have broken their hearts when they discovered the lie⁠—but then, it was too late!”⁠—and the Prince led the shout of laughter.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
