<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 22</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXII</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>Like as a Father pitieth his children.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>Whoso is wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand the loving-kindness of the Lord.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>Alone once more, poor Bottom Dog felt the weakness descend upon him.</p>
			<p>It was easy to show pluck when others were present. There was some object to be gained⁠—a mission to help the trouble which he, by his condition, continually created.</p>
			<p>It was when he was alone that the real darkness fell, and the Prince of Fear buffetted him.</p>
			<p>What was it that Visionary Child had said? “For Love you have suffered, and Love will never fail you to the end⁠—and there is no end!”</p>
			<p>Ah, yes⁠—Christ’s love⁠—the length and breadth and the depth and height of it⁠—passing knowledge!</p>
			<p>And yet something hurt still. If some of this love⁠—just a breath of it⁠—could be incarnated into something human⁠—</p>
			<p>“My dear chap!” came the Captain’s cheerful voice. “I am awfully sorry to bother you again, but someone else wishes to see you.”</p>
			<p>A frown crossed the patient’s face.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps, if you don’t mind⁠—if you could manage to choke him off for tonight, I should be glad. I don’t want to funk my duties, but my head⁠—well, it’s splitting!”</p>
			<p>“But that’s the difficulty. That’s where I am floored. I cannot lay violent hands on a woman. Never have and never mean to!”</p>
			<p>The blood rushed to Bottom Dog’s face.</p>
			<p>“It isn’t my mother⁠—come after all?”</p>
			<p>“No! But you’re hot. She’s a young woman. She has brought a message from your mother. She gave her name as Miss Davidson.”</p>
			<p>The bed sank down and down, and the next thing Bottom Dog knew was that the Captain’s arm was under his head, and a glass of water was being held to his lips.</p>
			<p>“That’s better!” said the Captain in a relieved tone, as he noted the signs of revival. He did not quite understand what had happened, but he wasn’t a fool and made a good guess.</p>
			<p>“I’m all right,” whispered the sick man.</p>
			<p>“I see you are, but I’m really not fit myself for frights like this! Now, lie still⁠—there’s no earthly hurry. The young lady can wait!”</p>
			<p>“But⁠—you’ll let me see her?” The Captain noticed with a pang that he still used the familiar expression.</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—she shall come. You’ll sleep better when you have seen her!”</p>
			<p>A few minutes later the Captain left the room, and Bottom Dog listened to his retreating footsteps along the polished oak gallery.</p>
			<p>Then there was silence. Yet he listened with feverish intensity. Yes⁠—they were coming! A heavy tread⁠—a light tread⁠—nearer, nearer. They must be at the door. The handle turned. “God! That I might see her!” so the agony broke from him.</p>
			<p>“Go right in, Miss Davidson.” Then he heard the door close.</p>
			<p>There was a breathless silence. The man lay quivering, and the girl stood clenching her hands and staring at the form on the bed.</p>
			<p>“Olive⁠—you are in the room?”</p>
			<p>It was a large room, and he heard her move. She was coming to him. He felt her kneeling towards the foot of the bed. He put out his hand. He couldn’t reach her.</p>
			<p>“Jack!” she cried. “I can’t bear it! I called you a coward! I scorned you! I cast you off! And now⁠—I have hurt you past all forgiveness!”</p>
			<p>“Olive!” He was feeling after her. “Little girl.”</p>
			<p>She moved up nearer and took his hand in hers and laid her cheek upon it.</p>
			<p>“Don’t grieve!” he said tenderly. “It doesn’t matter.”</p>
			<p>“But it does!” she sobbed. “It matters that I cannot see you⁠—that is all!”</p>
			<p>“You know that you can never possibly want to see me again!” she said, raising her head. “But I had to come, just to ask you to forgive me before⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Before what?” he asked falteringly.</p>
			<p>“I am going to the Front⁠—to the East.”</p>
			<p>“That is splendid of you,” he said slowly.</p>
			<p>“It isn’t!” she contradicted, in a tone he knew so well. “With some girls it would be splendid, but with me it isn’t! I was going for pride, and for scorn of you! I wanted to show you that I dared and that you daren’t! And, besides⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Besides what, little girl?”</p>
			<p>“I was so miserable,” her cheek was down upon his hand again.</p>
			<p>“Don’t be miserable for me!” he pleaded. “You see, it has turned out for the best. I’m done for, and I would not like to have spoiled your life.”</p>
			<p>“It is spoiled!” She let go his hand. He had lost her. There was no sound save the gentle ticking of the clock, warning them that time passed.</p>
			<p>The girl grew desperate, as the man remained silent. She could see his lips twitching below the bandages.</p>
			<p>“Jack, promise me that when I come back, if you need me, you will let me come to you.”</p>
			<p>“Olive!” he reached out after her, but she avoided him. “You don’t know what you are saying!”</p>
			<p>“I do! I want to take back all my pride and cruelty. I want to be your wife⁠—to comfort you and serve you and help you to bear it!”</p>
			<p>“Olive! Have pity! Where are you? If you have taken back your words, we are still engaged!”</p>
			<p>“Are we?” she let him have her hand, and he raised it to his lips.</p>
			<p>Then the door opened and the Captain came noisily in.</p>
			<p>“I say, Captain! There must be a waistcoat of mine hanging somewhere⁠—can you find it for me?”</p>
			<p>The Captain did his behest, and the invalid fumbled until he found the right pocket.</p>
			<p>“Captain, bear witness that Miss Olive Davidson has agreed to be my wife!” He had found the once discarded ring, and was putting it on the girl’s finger.</p>
			<p>“This is hot stuff!” gasped the Captain. “Was that the message from his mother, Miss Davidson?”</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—I forgot it!” the girl gave a joyous laugh, yet the Captain saw the sparkle of unshed tears in her eyes.</p>
			<p>“False pretences!” objected he. Then he added musingly⁠—“Queer world, this!”</p>
			<p>“Oh, my Father!” whispered the blind man, when he was once more alone. “Was this part of the meaning of the Child’s Message? Shall I ever distrust Thy loving kindness again?”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
