<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 31</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-31" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>Woe to earth and sea! The Devil has descended to you in fierce anger, knowing that his time is short.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>“You know, George,” said Sir Joshua, as he and his son were alone together, “you really must be a little careful. I realise that you were excited tonight after the exceedingly melodramatic effort you had just heard; but if your words happen to be repeated in certain quarters, they may get you into trouble. Remember we are in a state of war.”</p>
			<p>“I know, father,” said the young man. “I am going to the Colonel tomorrow to report myself.”</p>
			<p>“You are going to break your oath?”</p>
			<p>“I cannot keep it.”</p>
			<p>“And I have lived to see this day?” said his father bitterly.</p>
			<p>“And I, father, have also lived to see this day,” said the son. “I wonder⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Well?” George smiled deprecatingly.</p>
			<p>“I wonder, father, which of us feels the most lonely?”</p>
			<p>The reply was unexpected. It drew a sharp oath from Sir Joshua, as he rose.</p>
			<p>He walked out through the glass doors into the frost-bound garden, and his wife heard him.</p>
			<p>“Joshua!” she laid her hands on his arm.</p>
			<p>“Well, my dear?” he struggled to keep his tone at least polite.</p>
			<p>“Won’t you throw it away and lift the other one?” she pleaded. “I know it is the only way.”</p>
			<p>He knew what she meant, and he put a hand on her arms. “The matter is out of my hands now,” he said with an attempt at reassurance, “and don’t let us quarrel over the thing. You have George on your side, surely that ought to satisfy you?”</p>
			<p>She shivered violently.</p>
			<p>“Come indoors! It is so cold and so⁠—so dark out here.”</p>
			<p>Sir Joshua sat long over the fire of flaming wood.</p>
			<p>Perhaps he had slept.</p>
			<p>At any rate he lifted his eyes and saw the Child standing at his side.</p>
			<p>“Sir Joshua,” and the Child stretched out to him a sword of pure Light, “this is the Last Weapon⁠—the Sword of Love. It is the only weapon that slays evil and heals the wound of the evildoer. Take it!”</p>
			<p>“Child!” he stammered, “I do not understand its use!”</p>
			<p>“Yet, take it!” pleaded the Child.</p>
			<p>And suddenly a figure of Darkness thrust himself between Sir Joshua and the Child.</p>
			<p>The man uttered a sharp cry. When he reopened his eyes the vision had passed.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
