<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 15</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title"> Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> </h2>
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>Keep cool! Keep awake! Your enemy the devil prowls like a roaring lion looking out for someone to devour. Resist him. Keep your foothold in the faith, and learn to pay the same tax of suffering as the rest of your brotherhood.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p> Therefore at this Fair, are all such merchandise sold, as houses, lands, trades, places, honors, preferments, titles, countries, kingdoms, lusts, pleasures, and delights of all sorts. And behold, as the Pilgrims entered into the Fair, all the people were moved and the Town itself, as it were in a hubbub about them … but the men being patient, and not rendering railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing, and giving good words for bad, and kindness for injuries done, some men in the Fair, that were more observing and less prejudiced than the rest, began to check and blame the baser sort for their continual abuses done by them to the Pilgrims. </p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>Now it happened that some of the Sons of Fear held deep consultation together at this time, for it had come to their knowledge that a group of young people, calling themselves Pilgrims of Peace, were wandering about the country, preaching boldly to all who would listen to them, that Love was the only weapon by which Peace could be established on earth.</p>
			<p>They spoke with such sympathy towards the sorrow-stricken, such modesty, and showed such profound desire to bring light into the darkness, that men and women listened to them thoughtfully, and went back to their homes wondering whether there could be any Light in this strange Message.</p>
			<p>It was high time that the Sons of Fear set to work in good earnest to combat such a danger to their Prince’s Cause.</p>
			<p>The Pilgrims had even had the audacity to approach the town of Thorough, the domain of Sir Joshua Power himself, where night and day the furnaces roared, and men and women toiled and sweated and made excellent money, in the manufacture of the weapons of Fear.</p>
			<p>They had in advance placarded the town with a poster which amounted to an insult to the inhabitants.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>A NEW COMMANDMENT:</p>
				<p>The Darkness is past, and the true Light now shineth.</p>
				<p>He that saith he is in the Light, and hateth his brother, is in Darkness, even until now.</p>
				<p>This is the Message that ye heard from the beginning, that we should love one another.</p>
				<p>Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer, and ye know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him.</p>
				<p>Perfect Love casteth out Fear, for Fear hath torment.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Luckily, however, terrible things had been happening within the last few days at the seat of war, and my lord Cruelty had been achieving such a series of successes that he had been compelled to rush away to report himself to his Prince, so that he might celebrate his triumph by a very orgy of mocking laughter.</p>
			<p>Moreover, deep trouble had befallen Thorough, for news had leaked through that the very flower of its youth⁠—sent forth but a month before in pride and hope⁠—had been cut to pieces and annihilated upon the altar of War.</p>
			<p>Places were empty by the firesides⁠—knitting was flung aside unfinished⁠—parcels were left untied⁠—fathers and brothers talked low together, and the women looked into the future with scared and bewildered eyes.</p>
			<p>The Sons of Fear counted upon a sure victory, for it would be a simple matter to stir such sorrow and such righteous indignation to flame.</p>
			<p>Therefore, it was decided that the Preacher’s study was the surest opening for the attack, and one of the Sons of Fear volunteered to suggest to the Preacher his text.</p>
			<p>“Thine eye shall find out all thine enemies: thy right hand shall find out those that hate thee. Thou shalt make them as a fiery oven in the time of thine anger. The LORD shall swallow them up in His wrath, and the fire shall devour them. Their fruit shalt thou destroy from the earth, and their seed from among the children of men.”</p>
			<p>So the words of fire rang from the pulpit, and the Preacher made the people quiver under the terror of what would befall their country, if the arm of the LORD were stayed prematurely, and certain misguided persons⁠—for aught he knew, in league with the enemy⁠—were allowed to visit the town and proclaim their dangerous doctrine. They owed it to all those who had laid down their noble young lives as a sacrifice to Jesus Christ, to resist any attempt to weaken the hands of the nation in prosecuting this war, until the enemy was crushed beyond the possibility of rising again.</p>
			<p>“And now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost,” said the Preacher, and as he passed to the Altar, to kneel before the uplifted cross, he felt that his effort had been supremely successful.</p>
			<p>As he was leaving the vestry, he was not surprised to receive a visit from Lady Power. She was the wife of Sir Joshua Power, the chief inspirer and director of the Thorough Armament works⁠—the man of the moment, upon whom the whole Empire was now depending.</p>
			<p>The Preacher held out his hand cordially.</p>
			<p>“No⁠—” she said cooly, “I did not come to shake hands, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fearing, I came to be abominably rude!”</p>
			<p>“I beg your pardon, Lady Power,” said the Preacher. He knew that Lady Power was somewhat erratic, but this⁠—</p>
			<p>“I am considered to be a straightforward woman, and I prefer to say exactly what I think and be done with it.”</p>
			<p>“I am sure that anything you have to say, Lady Power⁠—” he began, knitting his brows.</p>
			<p>“What I have to say is simple, but perhaps not nice,” and she smiled relentingly. “I have listened most carefully to your sermon this evening, and I have come to the reluctant conclusion that you are a fool, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fearing!”</p>
			<p>“From any other woman,” he exclaimed, flushing deeply⁠—</p>
			<p>“I know. But I am just the one woman who can tell you⁠—think it over!” and again she smiled.</p>
			<p>“Incomprehensible!” murmured the Preacher, as he watched the lady depart. He was effectually shaken down from his pinnacle of complacency. And from Lady Power of all people!</p>
			<p>She was exactly the person of all others who, he would have thought⁠—</p>
			<p>“It is really of no importance what you thought,” said the Child quietly. “Lady Power is right. The fool hath said in his heart, ‘There is no God!’ That is what you have taught your people tonight! It is a pity⁠—for it is a lie!”</p>
			<p>“I must have dreamed it all!” said the Preacher uncomfortably, as he hurried home to his Sunday supper. Happily his wife would reassure him.</p>
			<p>And meanwhile the churchgoers poured into the streets, and excitedly passed on the interesting news to their neighbours, and a strong passion awoke against the coming strangers; for it was refreshing to have some target at which to shoot their arrows of misery and indignation. Were not these people friends of the enemy, traitors to their country, and likely to interfere with the legitimate trade of Thorough?</p>
			<p>The Child, passing in and out amongst them, was aware of the unholy influence, for the very children talked fiercely, or shouted rough revengeful songs, or quarrelled bitterly with one another.</p>
			<p>When the river of righteous indignation and the dark waters of self-interest happen to run in the same channel, the torrent is well-nigh almighty.</p>
			<p>The Preacher, obviously the chief authority on righteousness, had proclaimed that the Pilgrims must be resisted, and the Sons of Fear had determined that it was no longer safe in their Prince’s interests that this Message of the New Commandment should even be heard.</p>
			<p>So it came about that the people, moved by the subtle influence, resorted with unholy glee to the cheap device of tearing the New Commandment from the hoardings.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
