<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 10</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>He gave His people over unto the sword, and was wroth with His inheritance. The fire consumed their young men, and their maidens were not given in marriage.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>Dorothy walked across the lawn. The tennis poles leaned towards each other disconsolately, reaching out for the net which was not there, and the daisies twinkled triumphantly through the heavy grass.</p>
			<p>But the state of the lawn did not really matter.</p>
			<p>The girl passed into the shrubbery. The weeds flourished amidst the luxurious wilderness of herbaceous colouring.</p>
			<p>She walked slowly, and a perky terrier trotted soberly by her side.</p>
			<p>“I might weed,” she thought, then shook her head. “Weeding doesn’t matter either!”</p>
			<p>Presently she reached the old garden-house. She pulled open the door with a jerk. The place smelt musty.</p>
			<p>Some warped tennis rackets leaned against the wall. A dirty ball had rolled away from its companions in the broken cardboard box. The terrier sniffed the ball and looked up expectantly, for an old ball was surely his perquisite.</p>
			<p>But Dorothy shook her head.</p>
			<p>A faded college cap was lying on a canvas chair. Some snapshots, damped and curled, lay on the dusty table.</p>
			<p>She pulled the snapshots straight, and looked at them one by one. There were small groups, big groups, pictures of laughter, fun, and youth-time nonsense. Dorothy did not smile, but laid them down reverently, where she had found them.</p>
			<p>“Come Gip!” she said peremptorily, and the terrier left the ball and followed her.</p>
			<p>On her way back to the house, she passed through the stable yard. She knew what she must see, and yet she unbolted the stable door. Only the old familiar scent greeted her. What she missed was the eager drawing of the chains.</p>
			<p>The dog sprang at a startled mouse, which escaped behind the corn bin.</p>
			<p>“Come Gip!” she said once more.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The evening was closing in as she wandered into the drawing room⁠—the “Glory room,” as they used to call it, when the western sun was shining.</p>
			<p>She threw open the piano, and leaning over towards the music cabinet, she pulled out an old song book, opened it at random, and began to play softly. She did not sing. Why should she, when the tune was enough?</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>Oft in the stilly night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere slumber’s chain has bound me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fond memory brings the light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of other days around me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The smiles, the tears of boyhood’s years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The words of love then spoken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eyes that shone, now dimmed and gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cheerful hearts now broken.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When I remember all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The friends so linked together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve seen around me fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like leaves in wintry weather,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I feel like one who treads alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some banquet hell deserted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose lights are fled, whose garlands dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all but he departed⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Tears welled up into her eyes, and she brushed them away violently.</p>
			<p>“What nonsense to play a sentimental thing like that!” So Dorothy mocked at herself. “Let me find something cheerful!” and she turned back the pages.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>Forty years on when afar and asunder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="l1">Parted are those who are singing today.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When you look back and regretfully wonder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="l1">What you were like in your work and your play.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then it may be there will often come o’er you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="l1">Glimpses of notes, like the catch of a song.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Visions of boyhood shall float them before you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="l1">Echoes of dreamland shall bear them along!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Follow up! Follow up! Follow up! Follow up! Follow up!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till the field ring again and again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the tramp of the twenty-two men!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="l2">Follow up! Follow up!</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Louder and louder and yet louder the girl played, until finishing with a stumbling crash, she leaned her head down on the piano and burst into a passion of tears.</p>
			<p>The door opened.</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—beg pardon, Miss Dorothy!” said the maid.</p>
			<p>“What is it Margery?”</p>
			<p>“Only Nellie Loveday from the village has called. She heard you were home, Miss Dorothy⁠—but I will tell her to come another time.”</p>
			<p>“No⁠—no !” said the girl quickly. “Let her come in!”</p>
			<p>In a few moments, a dark-eyed girl came shyly into the room to seek some comfort from her late Sunday School teacher.</p>
			<p>Dorothy put out her hand and smiled a sad welcome. “That’s right, Nellie, come in!”</p>
			<p>Nellie glanced into her young teacher’s face. Disguise was impossible.</p>
			<p>“Oh Miss Dorothy! The boys have all gone!”</p>
			<p>Dorothy put her arm about the heart-broken village girl and having kissed her, she drew her gently to a seat.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>It was later in the evening that, as Dorothy’s mother wished her good-night, she said yearningly:</p>
			<p>“Dearest, it is nice to think that you are able to get this little holiday. You will really try to rest yourself as much as possible, won’t you?”</p>
			<p>The girl kissed her mother without replying. Then she went to the window, and drawing aside the blind, she looked out into the moonlight.</p>
			<p>All was very still; but Dorothy did not see the dim shrubs, nor the outlines of the distant trees.</p>
			<p>“Mother! What does the Moon see tonight?” She turned and faced her mother passionately.</p>
			<p>“My darling⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It’s no use, mother! I can’t bear it! I must get back to hospital tomorrow. It is awful there, but here⁠—”</p>
			<p>Her mother rose and put her arm about her daughter.</p>
			<p>“My darling⁠—I know what it is here!”</p>
			<p>“I’m sorry mother! Come and kiss me when I’m in bed!” and Dorothy broke away.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The Child went out under the Moonlight and stood there with trembling mouth and bedimmed eyes.</p>
			<p>He was startled as a cold hand was laid upon his shoulder.</p>
			<p>“Beautiful Messenger from Heaven, you cannot rob us of our harvest of tears!” mocked a dark-visaged Son of Fear, as he glided away.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
