<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide Mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear; your hands are full of blood.</p>
					<p>If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land; but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured by the sword, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>“Victory! Victory! O God of righteousness and honor!” The words thundered into the Child’s ear, as though from a million throats. “Confound our enemies! Strengthen our right arm, O God of Battles, that when we uplift Thy glittering sword, we may bring our enemies to the dust, that Thou mayest reign in righteousness amongst all nations!”</p>
			<p>“For King! For Country! For Fatherland! For Home! For Wife! For Child! O God, hear from Thy dwelling place!”</p>
			<p>“God! Help me to strike! Help me to blow them limb from limb⁠—the devils⁠—O God! Have mercy upon us all!”</p>
			<p>“God Almighty! Come on, you seed of the devil! Come on, you hell hounds! A million of you⁠—we’re readv! Now⁠—in the Name of Christ⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Merciful Saviour! Hast Thou not one drop of water, before⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Gracious Father, we humbly pray that Thou wilt give Thy holy angels charge to succour and defend our sailors, our soldiers, and airmen, in all their dangers and temptations.”</p>
			<p>“O God! Give me strength to get this poor chap out of this!”</p>
			<p>“Almighty Father! Thou Who alone doest perfect righteousness, we thank Thee for the blessed assurance that victory is certain for our Nation, for Thy great glory’s sake. Bless our guns, our shells, our bombs, our ships, our mines, and all and every means by which our rulers determine to overthrow the enemy. In the Name of Jesus Christ we ask it. Amen!”</p>
			<p>“Christ! O Mother of Christ! Save! Save! She is my mother⁠—my sister! O Jesu⁠—the children! They come! They are here! Ah⁠—damn you! Curse you! Beast! Brute! If⁠—”</p>
			<p>“O Holy Father, Thou who alone knowest the wickedness of our enemies, pour out upon them that punishment which is their due, and mercifully continue Thy favours to us, Thy children, warring for Thy truth. In the Name of our Crucified Saviour.”</p>
			<p>“O Holy Father! Endue these Thy noble sons, about to go forth to lay down their lives for Thy sake, with power from on high. Give them courage and skill to overcome their foes, and lead them not into temptation, but deliver them from evil. Amen!”</p>
			<p>“O Mighty God! We thank Thee that Thou hast delivered unto us the secret of true greatness. We thank Thee that we are not as others⁠—even as this enemy! Are not our hands clean in this great conflict, and our ways honorable? Stand by us in the hour of need, that through our victory, we may lead the world into Thy truth.”</p>
			<p>“O Holy Father! We are assured that we are Thy chosen people, brought forth by Heaven’s command to dominate the earth and the seas. Let not other nations fulfil their foul designs against us. Curse them in their madness, and bring them to a wise submission to Thy holy will.”</p>
			<p>“O God of Battles! Deliver us, we beseech Thee from the dangers descending upon us, through those who would cry ‘Peace’ when there is no peace. Confound their base endeavours, and let them not strengthen the hands of our enemies, nor lay Thy honor in the dust!”</p>
			<p>Then the Child lifted up his eyes beseechingly, as though he would hear no more.</p>
			<p>“Yet listen once again, my Child! There are other voices.”</p>
			<p>And a woman’s cry rang upwards to the throne.</p>
			<p>“Forgive us, as we forgive! O Christ! Teach me what this means! They have killed my boy⁠—my only son⁠—O God, dost Thou not know that I cannot bear it? Avenge me on their noblest⁠—No! No! Merciful Father forgive! Make not another woman’s heart desolate as mine!”</p>
			<p>“O God! Light! Give Light! Must I kill? I cannot kill! Is there no other way? They tell me in Thy Church, that Thy righteousness can only reign on earth, through trampling the Christ, we once knew, under foot! Is there some new Christ? Light! O God!”</p>
			<p>“Gentle Jesus. Stop this war. It is wicked. Everybody knows it is wicked. You, Gentle Jesus must hate it so. Won’t You please stop it before my Daddy has to kill anybody⁠—please!”</p>
			<p>“God! Is it true that Faith and Hope and Love are vanquished, and that Fear rules the world? Send us a sign that Thou art still in the Heavens!”</p>
			<p>“Thou art still on the Throne, O Christ God!” whispered the Child.</p>
			<p>“I am eternally on the Throne!”</p>
			<p>“What then, is this Fear that rules mankind, O Christ God?”</p>
			<p>“Would’st thou dare to enter the Halls of Fear for My sake?”</p>
			<p>The Child’s face shone with pure joy, as he answered: “If that would serve Thee, O King!”</p>
			<p>“He that serveth my brothers and sisters, serveth Me!”</p>
			<p>“That is enough, O King of Truth!” and the Child kissed the pierced feet.</p>
			<p>“And thou fearest not the Fear?”</p>
			<p>“What is this Fear?” faltered the Child.</p>
			<p>“Thou shalt learn!” and the Christ God drew a circle round the Child’s head with His finger.</p>
			<p>“Now thou art crowned with Love, for Perfect Love has all power to cast out Fear. Go thy way, and learn the meaning of ‘The Last Weapon’ offered to men by the Prince of Fear and ‘The Last Weapon’ offered by the Saviour of the World.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
