<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title"> Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="subtitle">Introductory</span> </h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>They crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put Him to an open shame.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>And behold, within the centremost court of Heaven, all music had ceased, and the multitudes waited with bowed heads, under a silence deep with agony, for this was the hour when the prayers of men ascended to the Throne, and none dared to lift his eyes to the face of the Christ God, seated at the right hand of the Majesty of Glory.</p>
			<p>But the Child, with eyes aflame with purest Love, passed through the throng, and none heard the sound of his naked feet, nor felt the touch of his soft raiment as he went.</p>
			<p>And the Child kneeled before the Christ God and gazed up into His face.</p>
			<p>And suddenly a great passion of adoring sympathy broke forth upon the Child, for he saw that the scars upon the forehead of the Christ God burned with agony, and that the wounds upon His hands and His feet were re-opened blood-red.</p>
			<p>Yet in His eyes, he saw neither doubt nor fear, but only the uttermost assurance of triumph; and as he bent low to kiss the wounded feet, the Christ God raised him to His side, and folded him within His arm.</p>
			<p>“What would’st thou, my Child?”</p>
			<p>“I would, O Christ God, that mine ears might be unlocked, so that I might understand this silence,” whispered the Child, “and I would also know⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Fear not to tell Me, thy King!”</p>
			<p>“I would know, O Christ God, why the scars on Thy forehead burn with agony, and why the wounds upon Thy hands and Thy feet are blood-red.”</p>
			<p>“Thou seest my wounds blood-red, because my children who profess My Name, have woven a thick veil of untruth between the peoples and Myself. Thus am I wounded in the house of My friends.”</p>
			<p>“Then⁠—is there naught I can do to serve Thee?” pleaded the Child.</p>
			<p>“Art thou willing to bear sorrow for My sake, as thou did’st once before?” and the Christ God smiled the smile of Heaven.</p>
			<p>“Thou knowest, O Christ God, that wherever Thou would’st send me, there I will go!” Yet the Child trembled within the arm that enfolded him.</p>
			<p>And the silence was deep in the Heavens for the space of an hour, and the Child waited in uttermost patience.</p>
			<p>“O Christ God !” he pleaded at last, “that I might bring healing to Thy wounds!”</p>
			<p><em>“It is through the wounding of love, that love will prevail!”</em> answered the Christ God.</p>
			<p>“I cannot understand!” faltered the Child.</p>
			<p>“Neither do my children upon earth understand! Kneel, and thou shalt hear.”</p>
			<p>And the Christ God touched the ears of the Child, as he bent low to listen.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
