<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>Then Jesus called His disciples unto Him and said: I have compassion on the multitude.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The train was crowded with soldiers, but they made room politely for a grave-eyed woman to seat herself as comfortably as might be.</p>
			<p>As for the Child, he stood in the doorway. His eyes were anxious, and his face was shaded with care, for he had been wandering up and down the land for many days and the sorrow and evil he had found was hurting intolerably.</p>
			<p>“Thunder take the war!” The soldier in the far corner spoke suddenly, as he carefully smoothed down his leg with a tobacco-stained hand. “They might as well stick me up against the nearest wall, and shoot me and have done with it!”</p>
			<p>“Why⁠—what’s wrong?” asked a keen-eyed recruit in a new uniform.</p>
			<p>“Wrong!” sneered the other. “Passed to report myself at the Depot for active service, that’s all! They say I can walk!”</p>
			<p>“But can you?”</p>
			<p>“Oh dear yes! Half-a-mile and a yard or two over! The Colonel would have had a bit of pity, but the doctor⁠—the old tottering fool⁠—takes a pride in clearing us out. Haven’t I had eight months of it? Why can’t they leave some of us chaps alone, and give you beggars your chance⁠—you’re keen enough!”</p>
			<p>“You mean you’re fed up with the war?”</p>
			<p>“War? Who’s talking about war? I’m an old soldier, and I know what war is! But this ain’t war! This is Imperial slaughter of the people⁠—a wholesale burnt-offering to the Devil! You see, youngster, you haven’t been there. I have! Good Lord! No⁠—we’ll keep His name out of it and say Prince of Darkness! Some of us have seen sights out there that make us afraid to open our eyes, even in this old country. ‘Glorious memories, to keep ’em going for the rest of their lives!’ that was some of the stuff us chaps at the front roared over, when we read it in the paper⁠—written by some big Government man, safe in the homeland!</p>
			<p>“Memories! Didn’t I see my own twin brother blown clean out of my sight? Could I find so much as his boots?”</p>
			<p>The man stopped, and no one felt inclined to speak.</p>
			<p>“My mother,” he went on in a quieter tone, “sends flowers across regular to put on his grave! I tell her there’s folks out there that does such things. I told her he’d died with his hand in mine, and her name on his lips! When she wanted his things, I told her as how the enemy had pinched ’em ! You needn’t to stare so, youngster! This is a lying business from top to bottom, as you’ll find out soon enough, and anyhow⁠—my mother’s worth a lie!”</p>
			<p>“How did it strike you that things were really going?” broke in a sunburnt sergeant.</p>
			<p>“Going? Well, it’s my opinion, mates,” and he eyed the men who were leaning forward eagerly, “that we can’t get through, and we know it! We are as good as they are, and they are as good as we are! We’re each of us setting our teeth into a file, and whenever doomsday turns up, we shall be there, unless⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Unless what?” asked the recruit.</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—nothing!”</p>
			<p>“But what are the enemy really like?” persisted the boy.</p>
			<p>“Depends!” said the other cautiously. “Most of ’em pretty much the same as we are. We’re none of us exactly lambs out there⁠—but there’s some⁠—well you wouldn’t care to meet ’em on a dark night⁠—nor let your wife meet ’em neither!”</p>
			<p>“First time I saw one,” interrupted a big Northerner, “I fairly turned green. He was a little bit of a chap on patrol duty. I came on him sudden, and could have stuck him as clean as a sucking pig. But my blood was cold, and you want a carcase chock full boiling before you can do the thing proper. So I punched him with my boot end to give him a chance.</p>
			<p>“Clear out, my lad!” I shouted. And he cleared out, like as if he’d learnt to talk in our village! Then I bethought myself that I was fighting for my country, so I cocked my rifle and got him. He was my first, and when I looked down at him, quivering like a snared rabbit that you’ve knocked on the head, well⁠—but that doesn’t matter!”</p>
			<p>“Ah⁠—” broke in a heavy-looking man opposite, “but you can’t be squeamish out there! If you don’t get your man, he’ll take blasted good care to get you!”</p>
			<p>“And the enemy are such fiends!” added the recruit, clenching his hands.</p>
			<p>“We are all fiends out there!” said the white-faced man with the shield over both his eyes.</p>
			<p>“Fiends and angels, mate!” corrected the Corner man. “One minute we’re tearing at one another’s throats, or scheming every devil’s trick to do for them, cursing, yelling, hacking, drinking to keep up the devilry⁠—finishing off the wounded⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh no!” exclaimed a woman’s voice.</p>
			<p>The soldier turned and stared at her.</p>
			<p>“And I say ‘yes’ madam!” he answered her defiantly. “Would you have us advance to trench number two, leaving a lot of half-dead fellows in trench number one to shoot us in the back? We all have to do it. It’s war, and there’s no time in war to run risks⁠—besides⁠—you’re a traitor to your own side if you run risks! It’s only on platforms and in leading articles and in lady’s drawing rooms that every nation curses the other for doing what every soldier knows he is bound to do!”</p>
			<p>“And sometimes, to kill him, is the last kindness you can do to your enemy!” put in the blind man. “You, lady,” and he turned in the woman’s direction, “don’t know what it means to be a blind soldier⁠—never able to see anything again except war, as long as you live!”</p>
			<p>“No,” she said softly. She sat back and bit her lips until the blood came.</p>
			<p>“But another time,” went on the Corner man, “we’ll go as soft as children, and risk our lives for some poor chap lying out in the open. I remember there was one of the enemy lying twenty yards from our trench. We could hear him crying and groaning, and shouting queer things in his beastly language; but one of our chaps who knew the lingo, got that nervous all of a sudden, that he shouts out to us, ‘Don’t you hear? He’s calling for his mother! I’m hanged if I can stand it!’</p>
			<p>‘Mother be damned!’ said one of the chaps⁠—He meant no offence, but it’s a touchy business out there when you begin to think about your mother. ‘I don’t care!’ shouts the lad⁠—‘I’ve got a mother too! Who’ll come?’</p>
			<p>“He leaps up, waving a bit of white stuff, and the chap as had damned his mother, and another were after him like a pistol shot. We dragged the fellow in, and we could hear the enemy shouting something or another. Both of us got a bit upset like, and for the rest of that day and all that night, we none of us fired a shot. We stuck our heads up instead, and had a look at one another. But that isn’t war,” he added bitterly. “It’s ‘against the regulations,’ as the Colonel told us! But sometimes out there there’s a queer sort of a something that comes up inside a man and makes him stick, where he would never have thought of sticking! Our officers generally know them times!”</p>
			<p>“The best everyday pluck I saw out there,” said the Northerner, “was at a time when we were cursedly short of water.</p>
			<p>“There was a well, raked by the enemy’s snipers, and every morning the Captain asked for volunteers, and every morning regularly a dozen stepped out, and there was never more than six or eight came in!”</p>
			<p>“It can’t surely be true, what the papers say, that you all want to go back?” asked the woman.</p>
			<p>“Want to go back?” asked the Corner man impressively, as he leaned across his neighbour to stare at her. “Well, madam, there’s some may say they are willing to go back, for swank, and some will say it when they know they’re too far gone to be sent back, and some will say it for sheer pride and duty, but if any man says he <em>wants</em> to go back⁠—he’s a dashed liar!”</p>
			<p>“I see⁠—”</p>
			<p>The blind man put out his hand involuntarily, as though by his hand he might see her.</p>
			<p>“Whoever you are, lady, if you’d ever slept in a hospital ward, and heard what the fellows yell out in their sleep, you’d never ask that!”</p>
			<p>“And as for the papers!” struck in the sergeant, as he rose and began to shoulder his belongings, “don’t you never believe nothing you read in newspapers! They are run by the wrong end of the world!”</p>
			<p>The train stopped, and with genial wishes of “Good luck!” to them all, he left them.</p>
			<p>“He’s off for a course of extra special bayonet and bomb-throwing training!” remarked the Northerner, “to teach the new recruits⁠—bless their innocent little hearts!”</p>
			<p>The company dropped to silence, and only the sound of the hurrying train could be heard. The Child watching, knew that another unseen passenger had pushed his way in amongst the group.</p>
			<p>“I wonder when the bell will ring?” remarked the Corner man meditatively. He was staring out towards a village nestling round an ivy-grown Church.</p>
			<p>“What bell?” asked the recruit.</p>
			<p>“The Peace bell, you fool! When are they going to ring it?”</p>
			<p>The grave-eyed woman leaned forward.</p>
			<p>“Whom do you mean by ‘they’?”</p>
			<p>“God knows!” he returned with reverence.</p>
			<p>“There’s not a man amongst them that has the pluck to give the first pull!” sneered the Northerner.</p>
			<p>“It’s the papers!” said the blind man restlessly. “If every newspaper with its lying news and its ‘Go-with-the-swim’ editor could be chucked into the Dead Sea, there might be some chance of common sense getting a look in. It’s nothing but the papers that keeps the devilry going!”</p>
			<p>“And the old men, terrified out of their wits in case the boys should stop thinking it worth while to die for their money-bags,” put in the Corner man.</p>
			<p>“Oh no!” challenged the recruit. “We are going out to die for the women and the children!”</p>
			<p>“Are you?” and the Corner man winked at the rough, heavy looking man opposite him.</p>
			<p>“And how about the <em>Christians</em>⁠—in all nations, who call us lot ‘the scourge in the hand of God to chastise their enemies!’ ” suggested the Northerner.</p>
			<p>“The queerest part of the whole business!” laughed the Corner man. “I’ll never say that war, as war, is wrong. It’s been my trade ever since I ran away from my mother; but it only needs a blind man to see⁠—no offence, mate⁠—that if these <em>Christians</em> had jumped clean out of their skins with horror when this war started, they could have stopped the whole bang business, and stood a better chance of getting things set straight than ever we soldiers could do! For I ask you⁠—what have we set straight?”</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—why didn’t they?” groaned the woman.</p>
			<p>“Because⁠—well, I’m not inside a parson, and don’t fancy the situation, but you see, we army men, we believe in our job, and when the chance comes, we’re there! But the parsons, they don’t down at the bottom, really believe in their job, and when their chance comes, they’re <em>not</em> there! As I said to an old Sunday School teacher of mine, who was boasting of the number of youngsters he’d got to join: ‘Look here, you’re a grand old man, and have done many a good turn to me when I was a young scamp, but don’t you go Sunday-School teaching no more. It doesn’t somehow go down to hear a man sing at the top of his voice:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Sufficient is Thine arm alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And our defence is sure.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>and know that all the time he is saying in his inside, ‘But we should be dished if we hadn’t our army and our navy’! If I set up for believing in an Almighty God, I wouldn’t insult Him like that!”</p>
			<p>“If only our Nation could invent some new force⁠—press a button⁠—and clear the other lot off the face of the earth!” laughed the heavy-featured man.</p>
			<p>“The other chaps would only get hold of it, and do the same for us!” chaffed the Northerner.</p>
			<p>“And suppose we could invent the power⁠—would we use it?” asked the recruit.</p>
			<p>“Why, of course, the quicker the better! Anything to stop the dashed business!” said the Northerner.</p>
			<p>“Something of that sort is going to be the only way, I do believe!” said the Corner man thoughtfully.</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—but it can’t be!” exclaimed the woman, more to herself than to her companions.</p>
			<p><em>“No⁠—there is one other way, if any nation has the courage to take it!”</em> said the Child, revealing himself to them.</p>
			<p>“Why⁠—who are you?” exclaimed the recruit.</p>
			<p>“I am a Messenger from Paradise!” said the Child. “I have come to give you a Message from your Father. There is but one way out⁠—the highest, the noblest⁠—worth dying for a thousand times⁠—for it is the only way which will bring about the salvation of the world!”</p>
			<p>“And what is that way?” asked the Corner man breathlessly. He had laid down his pipe and pulled off his cap.</p>
			<p>
				<em>“Take up the Last Weapon of Fearless Love. Lay down your arms, for they are cursed, for they belong, not to God, but to the Prince of Fear!”</em>
			</p>
			<p>The Child was gone, and the men stared at one another.</p>
			<p>“I saw him!” exclaimed the blind man.</p>
			<p>“God have mercy on us!” breathed the others.</p>
			<p>“Let us pray!” said the woman.</p>
			<p>And every head was bowed.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
