<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 30</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>For thus said the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel:</p>
					<p>“In quietness and in confidence shall be your strength: and ye would not. But ye said: No; for we will flee upon horses; therefore shall ye flee: and we will ride upon the swift; therefore shall they that pursue you be swift.</p>
					<p>“One thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one; at the rebuke of five shall ye flee; till ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a mountain.”</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The Church Hall was packed, and hundreds were turned away. An unusual sense that something was going to happen pervaded the place.</p>
			<p>The reporters were sitting elbow to elbow, leaning across towards one another, whispering eagerly.</p>
			<p>What was it?</p>
			<p>“Peace!” someone said. Who said it?</p>
			<p>A wild thrill of suppressed excitement set hearts beating agonisingly.</p>
			<p>Peace! Could it be possible?</p>
			<p>Peace was a word that had lost its meaning⁠—People had forgotten it.</p>
			<p>“And if Peace comes!” lamented the brokenhearted⁠—“Peace will not bring them back!”</p>
			<p>It was noticed that the Minister was very pale, and altogether unlike his usual confident self.</p>
			<p>It was also noticed that when the meeting opened with a hymn to the Almighty, proclaiming confidence in God for National victory, and crying anathema upon the enemy, the young hero of the evening kneeled.</p>
			<p>The Chairman’s words were spoken in such a suppressed voice that they could not be heard properly. It was understood that he would reserve what he had to say to the end of the meeting.</p>
			<p>He thereupon called at once upon Sir Joshua Power, who had so honored the Church and their gallant young member by being present at the Welcome.</p>
			<p>Sir Joshua received a tremendous ovation, and he accepted it with a frankly gratified expression of pleasure.</p>
			<p>As soon as the tumult subsided, an anxious silence fell upon the audience, as Sir Joshua skillfully turned the reception to himself into compliment to the hero of the evening. Yet when he plunged into the real business of his speech his wife became aware that in reality he was not addressing the crowded gathering, nor even the reporters, but was making a great appeal to her.</p>
			<p>In a few telling sentences, he reduced the spirit of excited hope to one of deep depression, as he frankly and unerringly emphasised the present appalling difficulties of the situation.</p>
			<p>He dilated upon the grandeur of the sacrifices made by the nation, upon the heroisms of the soldiers, the courage of the ambulance, the endurance of the munition workers at home, and⁠—in spite of all⁠—upon their inability to get through. Not, of course, he urged, that there was the remotest fear of ultimate defeat⁠—none whatever⁠—but the Nation had to face the fact that the grip of a deadlock was upon them⁠—a deadlock which must mean that millions upon millions of the youth of the world⁠—of the youth nearest and dearest to them would still have to be sacrificed.</p>
			<p>“And yet!” he cried, “it would be worthwhile that the whole of our race was swept away rather than that we should give place to injustice, unrighteousness and slavery!”</p>
			<p>The audience gave him his reward in a thunderclap of applause⁠—yet this was not surely what Sir Joshua had come to say?</p>
			<p>He sipped some water, and then said in a quiet voice:</p>
			<p>“But suppose⁠—ladies and gentlemen, we have found the Last Weapon⁠—what then?”</p>
			<p>An electric shock swept through the people, as they waited breathlessly.</p>
			<p>“Suppose we possess this Last Weapon? Suppose we are in a position to cut through this deadlock tomorrow?”</p>
			<p>“Hush!” came from below⁠—to still a feeble effort to clap.</p>
			<p>“Suppose that because we hold this weapon, the enemy must choose Peace⁠—our Peace⁠—the Peace that will restore civilisation and secure liberty and righteousness⁠—aye, the very Kingdom of God upon the Earth⁠—or take the consequences?”</p>
			<p>Then the applause burst⁠—overwhelming⁠—intoxicated. He put out his hand.</p>
			<p>“Ladies and gentlemen, I see you understand. Yet what is this Last Weapon? It is a power⁠—Hellite is its name, which will make an end forever of armaments, battleships, trenches, bleeding and mutilated sons, brokenhearted wives and mothers. All the ideals we have struggled after for generations may now be realised. We hold the power to unite the whole world in a Federation of Peace, because we alone and one other friendly Power hold the secret of a new Force which nothing on earth, on sea or in the air can withstand.</p>
			<p>“Will you accept it? Will you use it? Will you go down on your knees and thank Almighty God who has delivered the enemy into our hands?”</p>
			<p>Sir Joshua sat down and the people rose and cheered on and on madly. Men and women stared at each other bewildered. What did it all mean⁠—exactly? Was the war over? Would the boys come home? The others need not go out! The business would not now be ruined! The little house need not be sold! The children’s training might be continued⁠—a thousand ideas rushed through excited brains.</p>
			<p>The telegraph boys darted in for their messages⁠—some of the reporters left hurriedly.</p>
			<p>But suddenly the audience realised that the man they had come to honor was standing waiting. His appearance was something of an anticlimax.</p>
			<p>Yet as he took a step forward, pale, tall, distinguished looking⁠—a soldier worth calling a soldier⁠—with his sleeve pinned to his coat, and his Star of Honour upon his breast, the people let off their excitement in another wild storm of clapping.</p>
			<p>He waited calmly at attention until the furor had ceased, then, after shooting one deprecating glance towards the chairman he began.</p>
			<p>For half an hour he held his audience with vivid and dramatic presentations of scene upon scene, tragedy, comedy, horror, heroism, misery⁠—he spared them nothing.</p>
			<p>Those on the platform looked at one another uncomfortably. It was not good to let in the daylight so crudely. Lady Power glanced at her son anxiously, and saw that he was leaning forward listening intently.</p>
			<p>Sir Joshua frowned and whispered something to the chairman, but the people sat spellbound.</p>
			<p>The young soldier’s voice softened⁠—trembled⁠—and they listened all the more earnestly.</p>
			<p>“Friends⁠—Fellow-members of this Church, for it is to you alone that I now speak⁠—what I have described to you is War.</p>
			<p>“The Church has told her sons that their highest way of serving Jesus Christ at this time is to stand by the God of War. I believed what the Church told me. I went⁠—and⁠—I have been faithful.</p>
			<p>“Once, as most of you know, I had other ambitions. I vowed to go out into the world to preach the good news that God so loved the world that He <em>gave</em>.</p>
			<p>“Instead, I have acted upon the assumption that God so loved the world that He <em>slew</em>.</p>
			<p>“I have taken it upon myself to despise the one Weapon He knew could alone prevail⁠—I have taken up the other, and it has broken in my hand.</p>
			<p>“Tonight you have heard of a Last Weapon. If I understand Sir Joshua aright, and I think I do, he is but leading us, the professed followers of Jesus Christ, forward to the logical outcome of the path we have persisted in following.</p>
			<p>“There is no other outlet to that path, except the one proposed to you tonight.</p>
			<p>“Only⁠—I deny that Hellite is the Last Weapon. The Last Weapon was never forged by the Prince of Fear. The Last Weapon is the Power of Fearless Love⁠—Love to the uttermost⁠—a Love with which we ourselves have been loved, which we pour out upon our fellows and upon every circumstance of life which meets and threatens us. Christ’s Weapon is the only Weapon which can ever right the wrong, set the crooked straight, slay greed and heal the world.</p>
			<p>“Christ’s Last Weapon is no weak reed which breaks and pierces the hand of those who trust to it.</p>
			<p>“Friends! As I hope one day to stand before the judgment seat of Christ, I implore you to choose this day whom ye will serve.</p>
			<p>“Will you strike with the Last Weapon of Darkness, offered you by the Prince of Fear, or will you strike with the Last Weapon of Love⁠—the one weapon which casts out all Fear, the gift of gifts from the Father of all Mankind, Who gave His Son to prove its power?</p>
			<p>“For myself, my war days are over. For the rest of my life, I go forth burdened with the knowledge that in the world’s supreme hour of need, I misunderstood my Captain’s orders and fought against Him. When He stood amidst the combatants, crowned with the agony of Love, I despised His power and cried with the rest:</p>
			<p>“Not this man, but Barabbas!”</p>
			<p>There was an attempt at applause from a few, but it died down almost instantaneously.</p>
			<p>Then a man from the gallery shouted out in a mocking tone. “And you call yourself a soldier of the king? You traitor!”</p>
			<p>“Tear off his Star! Tear off his uniform!” came from several parts of the hall.</p>
			<p>“He daren’t have said all that, if he hadn’t got his discharge!” sneered another.</p>
			<p>The officer flushed, started forward, then remained seated with an effort.</p>
			<p>The chairman was rising anxiously, when a clear voice rang out from the platform to the furthest corner of the gallery.</p>
			<p>“I have not got my discharge! Let me speak the truth too! The Last Weapon is not Destruction and Death⁠—It is Love and Life! The Last enemy that shall be destroyed is Death! Love is the only deliverer from the bondage of Fear. I also have decided to stand by Jesus Christ⁠—I also choose the winning side! I also refuse to fight and slay my brother!”</p>
			<p>Sir Joshua turned deadly white.</p>
			<p>In the hour of his triumph, his son had done⁠—what?</p>
			<p>The young officer stood quite still for a moment or two, as groans, cheers and counter-cheers greeted him. Then he stepped back and took his seat by the Lieutenant.</p>
			<p>“Friends,” said the Minister tremulously, “I confess I am not clear what to say to you tonight. I fear that the powers of Heaven and Hell are working in this meeting, and I would rather not take either side⁠—that is⁠—I mean⁠—Sir Joshua’s pronouncement has come as a great surprise, and perhaps as something of a shock to us all. I should like, however, to be quite clear on one point. I understand that there is no question of using this Hellite at present⁠—that is, the enemy will be given full opportunity to agree to an honorable Peace first?”</p>
			<p>Sir Joshua bowed his head⁠—that was a part of the programme of which he did not approve, and which he had not intended to labor.</p>
			<p>“And as for our beloved fellow-member, who has had it on his heart to speak to us as he has spoken, it is not for me to make any comment. I think I shall best meet the wishes of you all by pronouncing the benediction.</p>
			<p>“The Grace of Our Lord Jesus Christ and the Love of God and the Fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all⁠—Amen!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
