<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 14</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>If thine enemy hunger, feed him, if he be thirsty, give him drink.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>Lord, when saw we Thee an hungered, or thirsty, or sick?</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The old man was chopping wood diligently and even feverishly, as it seemed to the Child.</p>
			<p>His hands shook, and his lips muttered tremulously, while every now and then he glanced at the two soldiers who stood with fixed bayonets chatting together.</p>
			<p>A little later, an officer and a sergeant, wearing a different uniform, came along and drew up at the spot.</p>
			<p>“Whom are you guarding?” asked the officer.</p>
			<p>“That old villain, sir!” and he spat towards the prisoner. “He has been feeding and sheltering two of the enemy. We caught him red-handed!”</p>
			<p>“And we are making him useful, sir, until the church clock strikes six!” said the other with a grin.</p>
			<p>The old man looked up. He knew they were talking of him, and throwing down his axe, he staggered towards them imploringly.</p>
			<p>“Sir!” and he addressed the officer, “You are of the other army! You are not so hard in your country as we are! Can you not help? My wife is bedridden, and my sons⁠—three of them⁠—are fighting for you! I have given all I have for my poor country, and⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No use! You should have thought of all that before!” interrupted one of his guard sternly. “You know what you did, and you must take the consequences!”</p>
			<p>“But they were hungry, and soaked with the rain, and ready to die, and they asked me in the name of the good God⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—we’ve heard all that dozens of times! And as for the good God⁠—they’d call on the Devil if it would serve them! Thank your stars you are alive until six o’clock, and get on with your work!”</p>
			<p>“Oh, sir!” and he clutched at the officer’s coat, “Can’t you put in a word⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Get out!” and the guard flung him off, even as he frowned warningly at the officer.</p>
			<p>“Don’t take any notice of him, sir. We’ve had our orders, and if we don’t deal smartly with these peasants and show them that we mean business, the whole countryside will get out of hand!”</p>
			<p>“Poor beggar!” said Lieutenant Trueman, as he strode quickly away. “How one hates all this sordid part of the job!”</p>
			<p>“You are not quite used to it yet, sir,” said the sergeant, not without kindliness in his tone. “But it’s waste of energy to worry over a peasant!”</p>
			<p>“It is good that you hate it!” said the Child wistfully, as he touched the officer’s arm, “for it is written, ‘Woe unto them that call evil good and good evil, that put darkness for light and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!”</p>
			<p>“Why⁠—lovely Child! What are you doing alone in this awful place?” exclaimed he.</p>
			<p>“I am the Child from Paradise, where we call light, light, and darkness, darkness. Those who walk in darkness stumble and do the deeds of darkness. Have you then no help to offer to an old man caught in this net of evil?”</p>
			<p>“If I could⁠—” faltered the officer, “but this is war-time, and by the rules of war⁠—”</p>
			<p>“War is also of the darkness!” said the Child. “Why do you not throw down your arms and lift up the weapons of Light before it is too late?”</p>
			<p>“Too late?” stammered the young man.</p>
			<p>“The hour is coming when the world and the church will bow at your feet, and you will know then⁠—what is Darkness and what is Light!”</p>
			<p>“God in Heaven!” said the young man. “Did you see him, sergeant?”</p>
			<p>“See whom, sir?” and he struck a match.</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—no one,” said the officer, as he hurried on with flushed cheeks and a wildly beating heart.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>As the clock from the Church of the Blessed Magdalene struck six, the old man stood blindfolded against the wall.</p>
			<p>“Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye did it unto Me!” said the Child, as he grasped one of the prisoner’s bound hands.</p>
			<p>“Fire!” rang out the command.</p>
			<p>But the old man, looking far beyond the bandage tied between him and all earthly light, cried aloud:</p>
			<p>“Lord! when saw I Thee hungry, or thirsty, or cold, or naked?”</p>
			<p>And the answer came.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>“Get him buried quickly, before the villagers make any fuss!” ordered the officer in charge.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
