<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 25</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things that are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>Sir Joshua Power had had a busy month in the Great City. In some respects he felt that his plans were prospering. Yet he had an uncomfortable sense that something, he did not know exactly what, was working against him.</p>
			<p>Was this opposition seriously indicated by the vague word Pacifism, or was it something bigger and more disintegrating?</p>
			<p>Immense support gathered round his declaration that Pacifism, as he understood it, was materialistic, self-seeking, cowardly, and that the only possible hope for an idealistic future lay in prosecuting the war to the bitter end⁠—that is, to the utter destruction of the enemy, nationally, commercially and socially.</p>
			<p>The “Bitter-enders,” as they were popularly called, gained a spontaneous backing, for could they not hold up to the public admiration the stupendous heroism and reckless selflessness of the heroes who had counted not their lives dear unto them, but who had gone forth to kill and die in the name of the great future?</p>
			<p>From the standpoint that to win would be victory for righteousness and national stability, and to lose would be defeat, it was easy to accept the final advance.</p>
			<p>Any means which would bring about victory must be for the uplift of the world.</p>
			<p>Sir Joshua became the natural centre round which the extremists gathered. The cry rose in volume that the war was not being prosecuted with sufficient vigour⁠—there were slack hands and weak hearts in the counsels of the nation.</p>
			<p>What the whole civilised world wanted was a strong man who would dare to act strongly. It was intimated to Sir Joshua not once nor twice, not through one channel, but through a dozen cannels, that the nation was looking to him as that strong man.</p>
			<p>And yet, notwithstanding such gratifying vindication of his contention, Sir Joshua was also aware that the general atmosphere in the nation was changing. The people, shocked into acquiescence, were beginning to refind themselves, and were moreover daring to speak out with increasing clarity. Obviously it would be necessary to strike at the earliest possible moment, while the public could still be counted upon.</p>
			<p>Having run down into the country for a weekend, his first words after greeting his wife were:</p>
			<p>“Well, my dear, and how is George?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t quite know!” she said. “But I think he is really improving. At any rate there is a great change in him, which I am sure you will notice.”</p>
			<p>“What sort of change?” Sir Joshua’s eyes brightened. If only George could be got round, his sky would indeed be glowing.</p>
			<p>“Well⁠—he goes out more. He is out riding now. And he has taken to the piano again, and he reads⁠—reads a great deal.”</p>
			<p>“That’s good⁠—light stuff, I hope, to take his mind off the war?”</p>
			<p>“Well⁠—no,” she admitted. As a matter of fact, his reading seems to be principally religious⁠—the New Testament and that kind of thing!”</p>
			<p>Sir Joshua frowned.</p>
			<p>“I don’t like that, Helen, it isn’t natural. Morbid⁠—we must manage to stop that somehow. I hope the Preacher isn’t pestering him?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no!” and she smiled.</p>
			<p>“Does he sleep?”</p>
			<p>“Wonderfully. He has no difficulty in that direction now, and he is up early, just as in the old days.”</p>
			<p>“We must keep that from the authorities, or they’ll be wanting him back!” said Sir Joshua with a smile.</p>
			<p>“He must never go back!” said Lady Power quickly.</p>
			<p>“Ah, well⁠—of course that is quite natural for you to say, my dear, but⁠—however⁠—sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof, as the good people say.”</p>
			<p>There was a comfortable hour before dinner, and Sir Joshua, frankly glad to be at home again, flung himself down in a deep-seated chair and lighted a cigar.</p>
			<p>“But, my dear,” he said in an amused tone, “what is all this I hear at the office about a riot and a mob⁠—a batch of traitors, and Lady Power coming to the rescue and bringing the lot back to the Castle? Liberty Hall here, I know to my cost, for all the drawing-room meetings, pageants, and fêtes that an inventive countryside can suggest, but surely we draw the line at traitors!”</p>
			<p>“Who told you they were traitors?”</p>
			<p>“Well⁠—it seems that they are taking it upon themselves to stump the country, persuading any fools they happen to snare, that it is our bounden duty to lie down and lick the enemy’s boots!”</p>
			<p>“There is always a good deal of rubbish floating about in Thorough,” she said lightly. “Talk about women! That office of yours is the biggest gossip shop in the county!”</p>
			<p>“Admitted,” he laughed, “still, Morrison doesn’t lie more than he need, and he tells me that our best car has gone to be relined⁠—also that there is a sick man installed here at this precise moment.”</p>
			<p>“A blind man⁠—yes. Your Thorough mob behaved outrageously⁠—the cowards! The least I could do for the sheer honor of the town, was to see that he was nursed until fit to move. Besides⁠—George has taken to him. He has done George all the good in the world. If I could know it by nothing else, I know it by his eyes. They are the old eyes come back.”</p>
			<p>“Hum⁠—” muttered her husband dubiously. “Well⁠—I don’t suppose it matters exactly. You and I are above suspicion. Our opinions are too well known for anyone to confound us with these traitorous Peace fools.”</p>
			<p>“What particular opinions do you mean?”</p>
			<p>“Well, for one thing, that we made a criminal blunder in not being better prepared for war, and that now, there is only one way to bring Peace to the world.”</p>
			<p>“And what is the only way?”</p>
			<p>“Why⁠—my dear⁠—” and there was impatience in his tone, “it is obvious that our nation must prove itself strong enough to crush out the militarism of the enemy. Only when we can convince them by practical demonstration that it will never again be the remotest use for them to lift up their arms against us, shall we have World Peace and the security of our own interests.”</p>
			<p>“Interests?” she raised her eyebrows⁠—“we are not fighting for our own interests!”</p>
			<p>“No⁠—no⁠—well, not when we are on platforms, my dear! Some platforms, that is⁠—but we all know that every nation must secure her own interests⁠—combined with her ideals of course⁠—or she is lost!”</p>
			<p>“I see⁠—but Joshua, when is the happy moment coming when we shall be able to make this great demonstration? So far as I can judge, we are exactly as we were months ago, except for the blood and the treasure.”</p>
			<p>He smiled. “Pessimistic tonight! But things are perhaps better than they appear to the public. We have not wasted our time in the Great City⁠—that I can assure you. Wait one more week and⁠—well you will notice developments!”</p>
			<p>“What do you mean?” she said. He did not notice how restlessly she played with her hands.</p>
			<p>“We shall have prepared the Last Weapon!” he answered her quietly.</p>
			<p>“I don’t understand,” she breathed. The light was behind her, and he did not notice her whiteness.</p>
			<p>“Walls have ears, and wives⁠—well, Helen, I am not at liberty to tell even you. But I think I may say this much with confidence, that in a fortnight⁠—a month at the outside, the war will be over.”</p>
			<p>Her face lighted up with a sudden hope.</p>
			<p>“They are talking of Peace?” she exclaimed.</p>
			<p>“We shall talk of Peace!” he answered. “We shall have won the supreme triumph of securing Peace upon our own terms.”</p>
			<p>He faced suddenly round.</p>
			<p>“Why⁠—what is it?” she exclaimed, startled.</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—nothing,” he laughed out. “I only thought for a moment that we were being overheard. If this secret were to get out⁠—but of course that is absurd⁠—it can’t!”</p>
			<p>“Joshua⁠—tell me. What do you mean by your Last Weapon? What is this dreadful secret?”</p>
			<p>He smiled into her eyes. “Dreadful? That is scarcely the word! It is the Last Weapon⁠—the only way to bring Peace!” He tried to speak lightly, rather vexed with himself that he had said so much. “I think I will just run round the stables while the light lasts,” and he rose and left her.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
