<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">


<h2 epub:type="title">
 Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>
</h2>
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
 <p>For this is a people robbed and spoiled, in snaring all the young men of them, and they are hid in prison houses, they are for a prey, and none delivereth: and for a spoil and none saith “Restore.” Who among you will give ear to this? Who will hearken and hear for the after-time?</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>“My sweet, you have hurt yourself!”</p>
<p>The blue-eyed baby rushed across the daisied lawn with a cry, and hid her rosy face in her mother’s lap, so that she might be kissed and comforted and “made better.”</p>
<p>Thus, cheered to happiness once more, she shook back her curls and looked round to discover more sunny joy.</p>
<p>And the Child noticed a tall broad-shouldered young man pause on the steps which led down from the terrace of the old Manor House.</p>
<p>He had watched the little scene between mother and daughter with a strange expression of pain in his eyes.</p>
<p>“O Uncle David,” shouted Dolly rapturously. “There you are! Now you can swing me!”</p>
<p>“You tyrant!” he laughed. Then he rushed down the steps, and catching his niece up in his strong arms, he popped her into the swing and swung her higher and higher, until her toes touched the beech leaves, and she shrieked in purest bliss.</p>
<p>But authority, in the form of a matronly nurse, intervened, and after repeated huggings and kissings, the little girl was torn off to bed, and the brother and sister were left alone save for the invisible Child, who had flung himself down on the grass at their feet.</p>
<p>“Well?” asked the sister, looking at her brother challengingly. “Decided?”</p>
<p>“No, Katie.”</p>
<p>“You are perfectly unaccountable!” she answered him restlessly. “If only I were a man! Why David⁠—how can you doubt for a single moment?”</p>
<p>“That is the anguish!” he said, fixing his eyes unknowingly upon the Child.</p>
<p>“But now⁠—after all this dreadful news⁠—worse and worse every time we open a paper! Don’t you see⁠—suppose these fiends were⁠—well⁠—were doing things to mother and Dolly?”</p>
<p>“Or to you, little sister?”</p>
<p>“That is it!” she replied, eagerly pressing her point. “You know perfectly well that you would⁠—”</p>
<p>“Yes⁠—I know I would⁠—”</p>
<p>“Then, why not⁠—”</p>
<p>“<em>He</em> didn’t⁠—”</p>
<p>“Who didn’t?” she puzzled. “O⁠—h Christ you mean? But that <em>is</em> such nonsense, David⁠—it really is! He was quite different from us, and if He had been here today, I am perfectly sure He would⁠—”</p>
<p>“Train us in bayonet and bomb throwing?”</p>
<p>“Oh well⁠—that isn’t a fair way of putting it! Besides, David, it really is absurd that you should set your opinion up against everyone! Our Church Rulers, and all the best people we know, are perfectly sure that we are right and that God is on our side. You won’t go to Church now, or you would have heard the most convincing sermon yesterday. Eight of the village boys came up afterwards, promising to enlist.”</p>
<p>He nodded, but said nothing.</p>
<p>“And besides⁠—it is getting most frightfully awkward for me as I go about amongst the people, to know that I have a brother⁠—just the very man we want, who won’t!” she looked at him anxiously.</p>
<p>“Yes, it is very awkward for you, Katie, I’m sorry!”</p>
<p>“If you would join the ambulance service⁠—that would be better than nothing⁠—that is⁠—if you really <em>can’t</em> make up your mind to fight for your country!”</p>
<p>“If I go, I shall not hide myself even behind the heroism of a Red Cross, I shall go to the front and kill!” he said quickly.</p>
<p>“Oh, if only you would!”</p>
<p>“What a sigh !” he said kindly, as he laid his hand reassuringly on her knee. Then he rose. “Excuse me to mother, I shan’t be in to dinner.”</p>
<p>“But where are you going?”</p>
<p>“Into the outer darkness!” he laughed. Then he strode away.</p>

</section></body></html>
