<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 27</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>Can Satan cast out Satan?</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>Have nothing to do with the fruitless enterprises of the darkness; rather expose them.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The Minister went to close the window. Not that he was chilly. He was restless and unnerved, and when he did reach it, he flung it open wider.</p>
			<p>The telling remarks he had prepared for the evening had suddenly turned to tragic folly⁠—and there was no time to make further preparation. What was wrong? Was Harry a little unbalanced because of all he had gone through? He had heard that some men from the front were suffering from nerve strain.</p>
			<p>The way he ran off those stories⁠—so quickly one after another! Really, the poor fellow must have had unusually unfortunate experiences.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters stared out into his beautiful garden, so peacefully walled in from a rough world.</p>
			<p>But he must really pull himself together! What was he to say tonight? He had meant to draw a beautiful comparison between the “Well done!” of an earthly king and the “Well done!” of the King of kings. Why had Harry asked him that question in such an extraordinary way?</p>
			<p>And then, that strange story about the Child.</p>
			<p>Visions in the Bible were necessary theological beliefs, but nowadays they were signs of a want of balance. Everyone except a few cranks admitted that we had lost the extreme spiritual sense.</p>
			<p>And then he turned back into the room, and saw the Child standing there, crowned with Light, and with his wonderful blue eyes brimming with tears.</p>
			<p>“Why do you weep, beautiful Child?” he stammered.</p>
			<p>“If you do not weep yourself, you cannot understand why I should weep!”</p>
			<p>And the Child kneeled and covered his face with his hands, and the Minister suddenly kneeled likewise.</p>
			<p>“O, Christ God!” pleaded the Child, “lighten his darkness! Show him how Thy great Name is being blasphemed amongst the peoples! Show him that he is leading the young, the beautiful⁠—Thy children⁠—into the Darkness. Show him that the light he is carrying has been lighted by the Prince of Darkness⁠—that it is a false light⁠—and O, Christ God⁠—tonight⁠—show him that the Last Weapon is not Fear, but Love!”</p>
			<p>The Child ceased, and presently he rose and laid his hand on the Minister’s arm and looked at him with eyes in which sorrow and love were mingled.</p>
			<p>“What more can the Christ God do than He has done to show men the only way to Peace?” he pleaded with inexpressible yearning.</p>
			<p>The Child was gone, and inadvertently the Minister looked at the clock. There was not a moment to lose. Already he could hear the military band which was on its way to do honor to the man whom the king had delighted to honor⁠—and besides, Sir Joshua Power had asked to have a few words with him before the meeting started.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
