<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 20</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>Brothers! You are not in the Darkness for the Day to surprise you like thieves. You are all sons of the Light and sons of the Day.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>We must be sober, we who belong to the Day, clad in faith and love as our coat of mail, with the hope of salvation as our helmet⁠—for God destined us not for Wrath, but to gain salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ, Who died for us, that waking in life or sleeping in death, we should live together with Him. Therefore comfort yourselves together.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The Captain was sound asleep, for Bottom Dog had promised to call if he needed anything.</p>
			<p>The opiate had had its soothing effect, and as it released its hold, it threw a last dream to its weary patient.</p>
			<p>It was a dream of deep, deep blue and purple seas, and rich green seaweeds and brown and yellow and indigo rocks, and tossing white foam and laughing waves and gentle lappings of an indolent ocean.</p>
			<p>And Olive was there⁠—he could hear the sound of her laughter and the sweetness of her voice, and feel her hand upon his arm⁠—exquisite sensations mingled with the glory of the sea and the sky and the scented turf.</p>
			<p>But something broke the dream. What was it? Olive was no longer there⁠—the waters roared, the sky blackened⁠—there was the booming of guns⁠—shrieks of agony⁠—cries for help⁠—and somewhere out of the darkness, there came Olive’s voice, calling to him tauntingly:</p>
			<p>“I thought I was engaged to a <em>Man!</em> A man is no man who cannot fight and die for his king!”</p>
			<p>The sleeper gave a start and waked.</p>
			<p>From force of habit, he threw back the bedclothes to see if the light had come.</p>
			<p>With a groan he covered his head. Never again would he know when it was morning.</p>
			<p>The pain had returned to his eyes. He was, somehow, glad.</p>
			<p>Blind! Blind! He breathed the word over and over again, trying to take in the appalling meaning of it all.</p>
			<p>An overwhelming sense of need possessed him to escape to his cottage home, away up amongst the hills by the lead mine⁠—to get back to his mother.</p>
			<p>She had been so proud to think that he had turned into what she called a “gentleman.” But she would not despise him now. She would never thrust him out of her sight as useless. She would comfort him and share her last crust with him, and perhaps⁠—she would lead him up the fell side in the evening, and tell him that the sunset was there!</p>
			<p>He threw back the clothes again. Was he dreaming still?</p>
			<p>Surely he <em>was</em> blind? Yet standing by his bedside was a Child in sunshine robes and a crown of warm light encircling his head.</p>
			<p>“As one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you!” said the Child.</p>
			<p>The man threw out his hand towards the Child, and he took it between his own.</p>
			<p>“O beautiful Child, am I in the Light or the Darkness?”</p>
			<p>“Thou art in the bosom of God, and in Him is no Darkness at all!”</p>
			<p>“Do not fear!” pursued the Child, as the man made no answer. “For Love you have suffered⁠—Love will never fail you⁠—to the end⁠—and there is no end!”</p>
			<p>“It is true then,” said the man, “that the Child who spoke to the crowd was from Heaven?”</p>
			<p>“It is true! Yet why do you wonder? Do you not know that the Father has ten legions of angels ready at any moment to save His children?”</p>
			<p>“Yet He did not send!” said the blind man pitifully.</p>
			<p>“Neither did He send to the Garden!”</p>
			<p>“Forgive me !” cried the man. But the Child had gone, and only the feel of his warm hand remained.</p>
			<p>The Captain still slept heavily, and Bottom Dog did not wake him.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
