<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 24</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>Yet I have left Me seven thousand, all the knees which have not bowed to Baal, and every mouth which hath not kissed him.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>It was still early, and the crowds in the streets were hurrying as quickly as they might, for the City was darkened by the Prince of Fear, and men stumbled uncertainly as they passed along.</p>
			<p>The restaurants and theatres and places of entertainment were evidently in full swing, and they seemed to the Child to be out of harmony with the tragedy into which the world had been plunged. His heart was sore and he battled against the longing to return to the place of Light.</p>
			<p>“If any man could be like Jesus Christ in this miserable world, he was the nearest we have yet discovered!” said a young girl, as she hung on the arm of a shabbily-clothed man with broken bootsoles.</p>
			<p>“I left work and chanced them giving me the sack for cutting overtime!” said the girl. “If I starve from tomorrow, I’ll not miss paying him my last respects!”</p>
			<p>The Child’s face suddenly lightened.</p>
			<p>“I will pay him my last respects too!” he thought. “Perhaps he is one of the poor dreamers of Earth who has seen visions!”</p>
			<p>So he followed the young people into a huge galleried hall, and sensitively understood that the atmosphere had changed.</p>
			<p>“All men are Brothers!” hung in a banner behind the platform, and from the organ, solemn funeral music, rich with the promise of trimuph, throbbed out an inspiring welcome to the gathering audience.</p>
			<p>The platform was crowded with men and women, suffering as the men and women below them were suffering. Yet there was no sense of despair or even discouragement. As the applause broke, speakers, one after another, paid their tribute to the Master who had left them. The Child thrilled with renewed hope, as he discovered by that which the assembled multitude admired, the way their faces were set.</p>
			<p>“He was honest to his convictions! Brave to state them. Ready to face any storm! His courage rose high against fearful odds! And as for this war⁠—this vile tornado of hate⁠—it mocked his hopes, and in his physical weakness, the once strong man bowed and died!”</p>
			<p>“He was a born rebel!” cried another passionately. “Out for all there was to get for those to whom it belonged!”</p>
			<p>“Our Master never recognised defeat! Never shall I forget when he lost an election and the forces of reaction were howling their triumph! ‘Never mind lads!’ he said cheerfully, ‘there’s plenty of other work to be done, let’s get out and at it!’ ”</p>
			<p>“Our Master was no superior person! He was never a boss. He was a servant of the people⁠—one of themselves. Did he care for victory as a personal triumph? A victory to him only meant greater opportunity for greater service to those he loved so dearly. Was he out for honor, recognition, power? Never!</p>
			<p>“And he was never too big to attend to little things! He would toil for a day over some woman’s tragedy, or sit by the fireside with the children about his knee. The more you knew him, the more your confidence deepened, and your faith in God and humanity strengthened.</p>
			<p>“What did he care most about? The one ambition of his soul was to lift up those who were deepest down!</p>
			<p>“And comrades! Our Master was uncorrupted and incorruptible!”</p>
			<p>And the speaker waited until the heartbreaking applause torrented forth.</p>
			<p>“Our Master didn’t fight men!” he went on more quietly. “He fought systems. He saw God in every man. And tonight⁠—though we cannot see him, he would not have us mourn. He would have us strike the note of triumph, even in this hour of apparent defeat and darkness. As divinely inspired a leader of the people as ever Moses was in his day, he now calls to every one of us to rest neither day nor night in the fight of the faith, until this miserable system in which men, women and children toil and suffer and sin and perish shall be swept away!”</p>
			<p>Then a woman rose.</p>
			<p>“Comrades,” she began tenderly, “Our Master who has gone from us showed us new values⁠—the kind of values Jesus Christ showed long ago which men spurned from them as sheer folly.</p>
			<p>“Men will tell you that it is Hell to be poor. Our dead Master taught us that it was Hell to be rich while other people are poor.</p>
			<p>“Our Master was indeed a rebel against false values. He never taught that you could gain good by appealing to self-interest. He despised the gains of oppression and made the self-seekers ashamed. As a prophet he taught the rich to be ashamed of their riches⁠—and the skilled laborer ashamed not to throw in his lot with the unskilled.</p>
			<p>“Was he perfect? No⁠—our Master would never have counted himself perfect. He was not a world politician⁠—he was a prophet⁠—a seer of visions⁠—and comrades⁠—it seems to me at this hour, that it is prophets and not politicians we need.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Where there is no vision the people perish!’ ”</p>
			<p>The woman sat down and buried her face in her hands.</p>
			<p>“Comrades!” said another speaker. “A strange hour is coming upon us⁠—a testing hour! The chains of a damnable slavery may be rivetted upon us before we know it. If we must go down, let us go down with our flag flying!”</p>
			<p>“And remember, Comrades,” added another, “That we are of all of one race⁠—one blood⁠—the children of one Father. Our Master cried out in his weakness to me when the doom fell⁠—‘It is hard to begin all over again!’ But we are here to begin all over again! Let them crush Truth to earth as they dare, she will rise again!”</p>
			<p>The Child slipped away, and as he reached the street he looked upward into a heaven of stars which no power of the earth could dim, and whispered:</p>
			<p>“Oh, Christ God, I thank Thee! I am learning to understand.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
