<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 21</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>I beg you to reinstate him in your love. If you forgive the man, I forgive him, too; anything I had to forgive him has been forgiven in the presence of Christ for your sakes, in case Satan should take advantage of our position⁠—for I know his manoeuvres!</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The break-up of the meeting in the market place had been successful. Yet the people of Thorough were curiously dissatisfied. After all they had not heard the Message⁠—and a sense of loss prevailed.</p>
			<p>Moreover it is one thing to fling mud with a crowd, it is quite another to go home and think over what you have done.</p>
			<p>Then there was that Child! Opinion was utterly divided. Some declared that an Angel from Heaven had spoken; while others said that those who said such a thing were mad.</p>
			<p>Will Grierson was more dissatisfied than the rest. He had had thoroughly justifiable reasons for throwing those stones so accurately, and yet⁠—</p>
			<p>“They say that one of those fellows is blind!” a workman said in his hearing. “They’ve got a nurse and Sir Humphry Johnson, the great eye man, has been there. Hopeless!”</p>
			<p>“Jolly lucky that no one knows who did it!” said another.</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—that kind don’t prosecute! They love their enemies,” sneered another.</p>
			<p>“Shut up!” said a young man, reddening. “We all did it!”</p>
			<p>The first speaker stared at him questioningly.</p>
			<p>“I say we all did it!” repeated the young man. “It was just our good luck that none of our stones hit⁠—but we all made asses of ourselves!”</p>
			<p>His “enemy” was blind! He had blinded a man in his rage!</p>
			<p>For two days and nights Will Grierson suffered in silence.</p>
			<p>Then he could endure himself no longer.</p>
			<p>He walked out to the Castle, and went round to the back entrance.</p>
			<p>“Is the gentleman who was blinded at the meeting still here?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Why yes,” said the kitchen maid.</p>
			<p>“Would you be so good as to ask whether I may see him? My name is William Grierson.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know !” said the girl doubtfully.</p>
			<p>“If you will find out, I shall be very grateful!” he said earnestly. “I have something particular I want to tell him.”</p>
			<p>It was evidently not so easy to see his man as he had anticipated, but presently he was shown into a small waiting room, and the Captain came in to him.</p>
			<p>“You wish to see my friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Muir, I understand?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir, and by himself, please.”</p>
			<p>“You are in trouble!” said the Captain quietly, “can I help you?”</p>
			<p>“No you can’t, young man!” said the other sourly, “mind your own business!”</p>
			<p>The Captain put out his hand.</p>
			<p>“I’m sorry! I didn’t mean to intrude⁠—only <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Muir is in a good deal of pain just now, and I thought that I could spare him; but if you really wish to see him, I don’t think he would wish you to go away disappointed.”</p>
			<p>“It doesn’t matter!” said the man gloomily. “It was only that I know who flung them stones⁠—he ought to know, so as he can take the law.”</p>
			<p>The Captain’s face cleared.</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—I see! But you know, none of us, and especially <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Muir, would dream of prosecuting. He was only saying today how thankful he was that he did not know who had done it!”</p>
			<p>“But why?”</p>
			<p>“Well, we took all risks when we held the meeting. You never heard of Jesus Christ or of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul prosecuting the people who took up stones to stone them, did you? That wouldn’t be playing the game!”</p>
			<p>“You’re a dashed queer lot!” said the man, then he added irresolutely. “I wanted to tell him why I did it.”</p>
			<p>“I can understand that⁠—” began the Captain, as the secret dropped out.</p>
			<p>“I can’t sleep night nor day!” the man burst out passionately. “I know why I did it, and the Devil told me it was a dashed good reason enougn, but now⁠—the Devil always was a liar!”</p>
			<p>“That’s true enough!” said the Captain with a sympathic enthusiasm. “Do you know, I am sure <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Muir would rather see you, if you will promise only to stay five minutes!”</p>
			<p>“Three will about do it!” said the man. He was quivering with emotion.</p>
			<p>“Come then!” said the other.</p>
			<p>“Muir!” said the Captain as he entered the room, “a man of the name of Grierson wants to have a word with you. He is in trouble, and I thought you would rather see him. I told him he must only stay five minutes.”</p>
			<p>Bottom Dog turned on his pillow and held out his hand.</p>
			<p>The man stepped forward, and the Captain left the room.</p>
			<p>“Oh, sir⁠—I did it!” Grierson blurted out.</p>
			<p>“Let me have your hand!” said Bottom Dog quietly.</p>
			<p>“I can’t! You gentlemen don’t understand⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I’m no gentleman !” said Bottom Dog scornfully. “I was born in a cottage and brought up in a mine!”</p>
			<p>“So was I!” gasped the man.</p>
			<p>“I cannot find you!” said Bottom Dog, still feeling about with his hand.</p>
			<p>The man, moved beyond endurance, gripped it tightly.</p>
			<p>“That’s all right!” and Bottom Dog’s lips smiled.</p>
			<p>“I just wanted to tell you why I did it, sir!”</p>
			<p>“Chuck your ‘sir,’ ‘Mate’ is our word!”</p>
			<p>“Don’t you see, sir, I’ve two sons⁠—keen, fine lads, and they had never a thought but to do their duty, and off they went. And now, there’s one lying away out yonder⁠—God knows⁠—and the other is sitting by our fireside, being waited on hand and foot by the missis and me!”</p>
			<p>“You mean that he is blind?”</p>
			<p>“<em>Blind!</em> And I was fair mad when I heard tell in church that you lot were on the cursed enemy’s side⁠—the side of them that had blinded my son! And I was mad that you hadn’t the pluck to go out like my lads, and that you should stand back and let them devils try to smash through and trample upon us! If I could have gone out, I’d have killed a score with my own right hand for him that’s gone, and I’d have blinded fifty for him that’s sitting by our fireside.”</p>
			<p>“It’s a horrible feeling, I know it well!” said Bottom Dog sympathisingly.</p>
			<p>“But they wouldn’t take me! They said I was too old, sir! And that is why I went for you! I wanted to do something to someone, and I was crazy with joy that I had the luck to hit, and now⁠—I see!”</p>
			<p>“What do you see?”</p>
			<p>“I see that it’s a devil’s trick to get us poor fools to hit back! It only keeps the cursed business going on for ever!”</p>
			<p>“That is it! You’ve got it, mate!”</p>
			<p>“If you don’t hit back⁠—then it’s a stopper⁠—it dries up⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Right you are mate, only⁠—if you don’t hit back⁠—you must take up another Power⁠—You must have a weapon in your hand! There’s hot fighting for us all, right to the end!”</p>
			<p>“There’s a deal as wants to know what the Message was⁠—” said the man not quite understanding.</p>
			<p>“I am afraid the ladies have gone, and my friend has an engagement tomorrow⁠—Thorough has missed its chance for this time, but some day, when I’m fit, you must get up a meeting for me!”</p>
			<p>“But there’s something else I wanted to say!” said the man hurriedly. “You’ve a right to take the law on me, and I’ll do time and welcome. My name is William Grierson, and I live at number eleven⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Shut up! The idea of you dragging me into court! It would finish me clean off! But there is a kindness you might do me⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Any blessed thing you like to ask!”</p>
			<p>“Then get back home, and tell your son from me, that he answered the call he heard, and that I answered the call I heard, and that we are both wounded in the service! The King knows all his privates, and all the difficulties, and if we’ve got off the track, He’ll understand. But there’s another service waiting for new recruits! The Prince of Darkness is trying to doom the world by his delusions, but the King of Light wants heralds to proclaim that Light is the only power to conquer Darkness. We blind chaps have a place in the ranks there!”</p>
			<p>“I’ll tell him, right enough!” said the man, “but I’d go better satisfied if you’d say right out that you’ve forgiven me!”</p>
			<p>“Why my dear man! How can I help forgiving, when I have been forgiven so much myself?”</p>
			<p>“God bless you, sir.”</p>
			<p>“I’ll not leave loose of this hand until you call me ‘mate!’ ”</p>
			<p>“Mate, then, sir!” Bottom Dog laughed out.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
