<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 23</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">


<h2 epub:type="title">
 Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>
</h2>
<header>
<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Terrors shall make him afraid on every side; and shall scatter him to his feet.</p>
<p>His strength shall be hunger bitten, and destruction shall be ready at his side. His confidence shall be rooted out of his tent, and it shall bring him to the King of Terrors.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
<p>Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the arrow that flieth by day. Nor for the pestilence that walketh in darkness, nor for the destruction that wasteth at noonday.</p>
</blockquote>
</header>
<p>No wonder that terror had seized the Great City. The enemy had dared to ascend against them from above, and had shot down fire and death upon the innocent, and fierce indignation raged against the authorities whose business it was to offer protection.</p>
<p>The Child had seen the horror of it all, and had looked upon the destruction and upon the poor bodies of the slain, and he learned that even yet he could not understand. Why should the Sons of Fear still celebrate their victories?</p>
<p>As he passed into a crowded meeting, he was conscious of the electrical atmosphere, the suppressed excitement, the feverish tension, and he knew that the Sons of Fear were busily exploiting their victory, to bring about a fresh harvest of woe.</p>
<p>For the spirit of Fear resounded in every speech, and in the thunders of applause that greeted them.</p>
<p>The enemy had been doing diabolical things⁠—promiscuously murdering men, women, and children. Indignation flamed to rage. There was but one way in war⁠—one object in war. Men waged war to win, and whatever means meant victory, such means must be taken. It was sheer madness to rush down to ruin under the cowardly banner of a false scrupulosity.</p>
<p>“War!” exclaimed Sir Joshua Power, in his rich melodious voice, “is war! If it is to be waged at all, it must be waged to the knife. We must stick at nothing! We have conducted this war far too long with our gloves on! Let us fling our delusions to the wind and face facts!</p>
<p>“If they kill our women and children, we must kill their women and children. If they raid our cities and destroy our art treasures, we must raid their cities and destroy everything they value. If they destroy the homes of our people, we must destroy the homes of their people. In this hour of peril there remains no place for squeamish nonsense, for gentlemen⁠—remember this⁠—a proposition surely clear enough to every schoolboy⁠—unless the enemy is to crush us, we must crush them. War is not a game. War means life or death. Whatever diabolical means the enemy takes⁠—we must look to it that we are beforehand, and are not for ever lagging behind.</p>
<p>“Let us demand from our Government that they shall use any means known to them which will shorten this horror, and bring the enemy to our feet.</p>
<p>“Let us rouse the tiger blood of our great Empire! Let us call the millions of our dark-skinned countrymen to our aid. Let the fighting tribes of the world, graciously put at our disposal by Almighty God, come forth at the nation’s call.</p>
<p>“For the sake of our homes, our wives, our children, for the sake of all that is best and noblest⁠—for the sake of the Peace of the world, it is necessary that we should win this war by any and every means under our hand, or⁠—perish!”</p>
<p>Sir Joshua sat down amidst round after round of applause.</p>
<p>Michael Forward learned over and whispered:</p>
<p>“Excellently done! The thin edge accurately inserted. The spirit is all right! A clever touch about the dark tribes⁠—tested the audience, yet kept the secret!”</p>
<p>Then another speaker rose, to talk on another theme. He was a rough, domineering personage, popular with the vulgar. “You know, gentlemen,” he said scoffingly, “there’s a beastly lot of nonsense talked by sentimental folk who keep their heads safely stuck in the sand. They say we don’t hate the enemy⁠—Oh dear no⁠—of course not! Now I don’t understand that proposition. I’m one of your straightforward men! I like to call things by their right names. Now that’s sheer idiocy or it’s a hypocritical lie! I’m not even against a thundering good lie, if I’ve any use for it, but I’m not ashamed to say⁠—here and now⁠—that I do hate the enemy⁠—I would, if I could⁠—(loud laughter)⁠—clear him off the face of the earth. I say, that this nation from this time forward and for evermore, must have nothing to do with him or his. I would drive him from our land, neck and crop, refuse his goods, refuse him our goods, confiscate his property, repudiate our debts to him, kill his commerce⁠—and if any one dares to marry him⁠—well⁠—God help her!</p>
<p>“Ah⁠—you may laugh, but I tell you seriously, gentlemen, there will never be Peace in the world until this pestilence is rooted out!</p>
<p>“ ‘Wrong the wronger, till he render right!’ is a good old saying, but he never will render right! He is a poison through every current into which he tries to flow!</p>
<p>“And there’s another pestilence, gentlemen, of which I might put you on your guard.</p>
<p>“Just now we are infested by a plague of so-called Peace organisations⁠—run by the enemy’s gold⁠—which are blithering out infamous doctrines and quack remedies, which are calculated to drag us down under the foot of the foe! Search these people out! Rid our beloved country of them in God’s name⁠—”</p>
<p>The Child slipped away. He had heard enough.</p>

</section></body></html>
