<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 16</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>This is a rebellious people, lying children, children that will not hear the law of the Lord.</p>
					<p>Which say to the seers, “See not!” and to the prophets “Prophesy not unto us right things: speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits: get you out of the way. Turn aside out of the path. Cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us.”</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>It was on the following afternoon that the news was bruited about that the Pilgrims had arrived.</p>
			<p>There were five of them, three women and two men, and as they walked up the main street with knapsacks on their backs, they had laughed and chatted together with evident effrontery, as though quite unaware of the indignant glances thrown at them from all sides.</p>
			<p>They were obviously of no social standing, for their tourist clothes were old and weather-beaten, and somewhat to the town’s surprise, they wore no uniform, and there was nothing to distinguish them, except that in place of the universally-worn national badge, they displayed on their coats a small silver star.</p>
			<p>They disappeared into a modest lodging, and the people were left to arrange for their final effort in the market place early in the evening.</p>
			<p>“I wonder what the excitement is this afternoon?” said “Little One” as she drew back the curtain.</p>
			<p>“Never mind the street, come and eat!” laughed “Mother.”</p>
			<p>The five had given themselves nicknames for convenience. “Yes⁠—it’s good to find food again,” admitted Bottom Dog, as he pulled up the chairs to the rickety table.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps there are some more boys going off to the slaughter,” said Princess pitifully, as she looked out over Little One’s shoulder. “Oh, dear! One feels like a whiff of thistledown in the face of this storm!”</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—fancy five of us sticking ourselves up to think that we see something different from what the world is so sure about! Don’t you all feel futile?”</p>
			<p>Little One, in her doubts, her despairs, her merriment, and untiring courage was the refreshment point in the party.</p>
			<p>“The thistledown goes where the wind of God drives it, and it carries seeds,” remarked a big red-haired undergraduate.</p>
			<p>“Right as usual, Captain,” admitted the girl. “Now, Oh! bramble jelly! How lovely!”</p>
			<p>They enjoyed their early supper keenly, and enjoyed their conversation over their strange and ofttimes droll experiences. Presently, however, the sallow deep-eyed young man who had dubbed himself Bottom Dog, pushed back his chair.</p>
			<p>“I should say it is about time we made a move,” he suggested, “we want to catch them as they come out from work.”</p>
			<p>Bottom Dog had started life as a miner, had gravitated to a working men’s college, and was opening his eyes to the world and to God with a freshness of vision which was likely to carry him far.</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—we mustn’t be late!” agreed the Captain. “Then shall we?”</p>
			<p>They all understood the suggestion, and kneeling round the table, they waited in silence.</p>
			<p>“O God! Help us tonight,” pleaded the Princess presently; “we are not able to go out against this multitude except through Thy strength. O Father⁠—fill us with wisdom and faith in the Power of Love⁠—and⁠—courage when the great Fear comes down upon us.”</p>
			<p>“And, O loving Father,” said the Mother tenderly, “fill us with divine sympathy for all the sorrowing hearts in this town. Comfort them with Thy comfort⁠—for indeed they have done what they could!”</p>
			<p>“O Father⁠—keep us from turning traitor to Jesus Christ tonight,” said Little One.</p>
			<p>Neither of the men spoke, and presently, after a few minutes’ silence, they rose.</p>
			<p>“I have a strong impression,” said the Captain, “that we are to know something tonight of what it means to be wrestling⁠—not against flesh and blood, but against the Rulers of Darkness and Spiritual wickedness in High Places. I cannot tell you why I think this, but I do.”</p>
			<p>“I know!” said Bottom Dog gravely. “All day it has felt to me as though something were trying to stop me from saying my say⁠—telling me, in fact, that after all I have nothing to say!”</p>
			<p>“But you know that you have,” said the Mother quickly.</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—just the Message,” he answered her.</p>
			<p>They collected their bundles of leaflets, and as they came out into the street, they saw that a crowd had collected round the door.</p>
			<p>The Captain looked round keenly.</p>
			<p>“Would you women like to leave it to us tonight?” he asked hastily.</p>
			<p>“Oh, no!” they exclaimed, trying to smile away the anxiety they saw in his face.</p>
			<p>“Why⁠—what do you take us for?” chaffed Little One.</p>
			<p>“Then let us keep close together!” he said, and he and Bottom Dog took the outside of the path.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
