<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 18</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>Who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good? But, and if ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye; and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled; but sanctify the Lord God in your hearts; and be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and reverence.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>It would be difficult to exaggerate Lady Power’s kindness to that shattered little party.</p>
			<p>Baths, fresh clothes, luxurious rooms, everything possible was done to rob them of the sense of physical suffering and discomfort.</p>
			<p>But grief remained, and as the Captain, the Princess, and Little One sat together in the sitting room placed at their disposal, they talked in anxious tones about Bottom Dog.</p>
			<p>He was lying upstairs, with ice on his forehead, attended by the Mother and a male nurse who was in the Castle. Lady Power had telephoned for an eye specialist⁠—he was upstairs at the moment, and the three awaited the outcome.</p>
			<p>“It ought to have happened to me!” groaned the Captain.</p>
			<p>“You take too much upon yourself, Captain!” said the Princess whimsically, to hide her feelings. “I fancy we are all under orders!”</p>
			<p>She looked quaintly royal in Lady Power’s handsome tea-gown. It suited her wonderfully, for she had long cast aside her own finery, since she mobilised for Peace.</p>
			<p>“And poor Little One!” she added. “That ought to have happened to me!”</p>
			<p>Little One screwed up her face, one cheek of which was turning purple and red.</p>
			<p>“That would never have done, Princess!” she mocked. “I never did set up for being a beauty, and I shan’t be in the least offended if you prefer to look another way. The only thing I really hate is that the fist should have belonged to a woman. I wonder⁠—” she anointed her cheek with some soothing ointment Lady Power had provided.</p>
			<p>“Yes?” asked the Captain.</p>
			<p>“Only⁠—I wonder whether <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul felt a little bit scared when they yelled at him for two hours! I should so love to ask him.”</p>
			<p>The door opened, and the Mother came in. They started round, but no one spoke.</p>
			<p>“The doctor has gone,” she said.</p>
			<p>Little One leaped up and threw her arms round her.</p>
			<p>“Dearest, don’t cry!”</p>
			<p>“No⁠—I’m sorry!” stammered the girl.</p>
			<p>“Only⁠—Captain⁠—he wants you!”</p>
			<p>The Captain started forward, and suddenly his lip quivered. “Mother⁠—you can’t mean⁠—”</p>
			<p>She nodded. “The doctor can do nothing.”</p>
			<p>“Not both,” cried Little One.</p>
			<p>“Both!” breathed the girl.</p>
			<p>“Does he know?” whispered the Captain.</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>When the Captain entered the bedroom, he glanced nervously at the figure whose face was swathed in bandages.</p>
			<p>“Is that you, Captain?” asked a cheerful voice.</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—Oh Bottom Dog⁠—you are blind?” and he kneeled by the bed and gripped the other’s hand.</p>
			<p>“Don’t worry! So are hundreds of better men than me⁠—blind for their country!”</p>
			<p>“Are you in pain?”</p>
			<p>“A bit⁠—but they tell me it will go off. They have given me something. I say⁠—Captain! It is good of Him to have let a chap like me suffer for Him! Speak⁠—old man!”</p>
			<p>“It’s no use⁠—I can’t⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Then let us have a ‘Silence’ together,” he answered, and the Captain, understanding what he meant, bowed his head.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
