<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 12</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the 1 weary be at rest. There the prisoners rest together; they I hear not the voice of the Oppressor. The small and great are there, and the servant is freed from his master.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>For three days friend and foe had lived and died together in that wood, knowing the full horror of hunger and thirst, and the stench and agony of untended wounds.</p>
			<p>There had been no battle worth noting by correspondents, but merely a skirmish which had worked itself away from the main course, out of reach of the ambulance. The men on both sides had been reported “missing.” That was all.</p>
			<p>The Child from Paradise passed in and out amongst the sufferers, laying a cool hand on their brows, and whispering words of strong help and sweet memory, such as made broken men not ashamed to weep like tired children. Now and again he gave pitiful rebuke, or allayed the fury of despairing wrath, levelled against those who had driven them into the conflict. And to each he sought to shed abroad visions of that Kingdom which is the sure possession of the humble in spirit, but which the proud will never find. And wherever he passed, the dark-visaged Sons of Fear fled before him.</p>
			<p>“Oh my God! One drop of water!” So the wounded officer moaned, as the death agony beaded on his brow.</p>
			<p>There was a dull sound through the soaking grass, as of a pushing or dragging body, and presently a weak voice said:</p>
			<p>“Here then, my friend!” and the water, but a few drops, trickled to the officer’s parched tongue.</p>
			<p>Their glazing eyes met. The officer kissed the hand of the enemy private with his swollen lips.</p>
			<p>The private sank back⁠—his wound had reopened.</p>
			<p>“There will be no war on the other side!” panted the officer. “Let us go together!”</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—come with me. I will show you the way!” said the Child. And they saw him in all his radiance, with the crown of Love shining through the midnight hour.</p>
			<p>So the men, hand in hand, rose up from the couch of blood and followed the Child.</p>
			<p>And lo, on the other side, the friend and the enemy were not alone, for thousands upon thousands were passing from the battlefields of earth into the Wonderland of the Unseen.</p>
			<p>But whether friend or foe, none might tell, for the uniforms of war and of nations, and the filthy rags of self-righteousness, pride, vainglory, bitterness, and fury, had dropped away from them, and they stood together in one great company, bewildered and amazed.</p>
			<p>Yet at sight of the Christ God who passed amongst them, every man bowed low and sank upon his knees, knowing that he was poor and naked and ashamed and unutterably sorry.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
