<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 26</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>No man can serve two masters; either he will hate the one and love the other, or else he will stand by the one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and Mammon.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The Minister rose from his knees. Tonight was to be a great night, and he had been thanking his Master for the revealing truth that He was a God of Battles. If God were not a God of Battles, then indeed his heart must have failed him.</p>
			<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Matthew Waters was esteemed as something of a prophet in his generation, for he had been an inspiration to thousands⁠—a light lifted up to deliver men from selfishness and greed, and to lead them into the way of love to Christ and service to man; and in his enthusiasm for his Master, he had called upon his nation, by writing and by speech, to cast aside their trust in the weapons of war, and to stand forth as pioneers of Peace, Goodwill, and Brotherhood⁠—let the cost be what it might.</p>
			<p>Therefore when the Prince of Fear set forth to delude the world to its undoing, he did not forget the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Matthew Waters.</p>
			<p>Thus it came about that at the outbreak of war the Minister discovered that he had made a mistake⁠—that he had misread his Master’s mind. It was clearly not possible in the first instance to cast out such awful evil as had broken forth, by the weapons of Christ alone. To rely on such weapons would lead to the crucifixion of everything holy that one loved and honored. The conflict might indeed be a spiritual one, but the spiritual forces of evil had incarnated themselves into flesh and blood. There was but one kind of power sufficient for these conditions. The Christ Himself had ordered an advance behind the banner of the Prince of Fear, under penalty of High Treason to Himself.</p>
			<p>So hundreds of young men whom the Minister had baptised in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, went forth, inspired by his clarion call, nobly, willingly, and joyously, to take up the arms of flesh that they might do battle against the spirit forces of Darkness.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters had counted the number of them proudly, had emblazoned their names upon his church walls, caused the children in the Sunday School to salute the Honour Roll as they passed, and had his own private list in his study, that he might remember each in passionate prayer, that they might be blessed and kept spotless from the world in their great mission.</p>
			<p>But as the months passed the Minister wrestled in prayer with increasing fervor born of a bewildering doubt. For some inscrutable reason the fighting mission did not show any trace of Divine blessing, and indeed, some scorners said that the blessing was being vouchsafed to the enemy, or that the Almighty was, at the very most, standing aloof⁠—letting men take their way.</p>
			<p>So as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters looked round with anxious eyes to find direction through the tangled path, he came to the conclusion that God was only waiting to bless his country’s arms to victory, so soon as the people were prepared to put away their manifold sins and humble themselves in penitence before the throne of God.</p>
			<p>But meanwhile, the arm of flesh must be strengthened, and a great meeting was to be held that night in the Church Hall to welcome one of the congregation who had returned home on leave, decorated with the Star of Honour.</p>
			<p>The whole Church was excited, and absorbed in making the “welcome home” worthy of the occasion; and it was sincerely hoped that through this effort, the Church would win through to the honor of having sent the largest number of men into the field of any Church in the kingdom.</p>
			<p>“Why, Harry! what a surprise!” exclaimed the Minister rapturously, as the door opened, and the young lieutenant came in upon him. “I feared I should not see you until the great occasion!”</p>
			<p>Lieutenant Trueman lifted his shoulders, as he gripped his Minister’s hand. He was tall and strongly built, with deep-set eyes, a firm mouth and a square chin, and as he looked round the room, his eyes stayed on the list.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said the Minister, “yes⁠—there they are⁠—all of them. So many, poor boys, have passed Beyond. I have marked those with the Cross.”</p>
			<p>The young man glanced down the list, and noted the men he remembered, who had fallen.</p>
			<p>“Did you have a very bad time with your arm?” asked the Minister, as he motioned his guest to an easy chair.</p>
			<p>“Not specially,” he said indifferently, “it bothered, the usual thing I suppose, until I got rid of it.”</p>
			<p>“And your Star of Honour⁠—may I look?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes.”</p>
			<p>“You’ll have a cigar?” asked the Minister, as after closely examining the decoration, he opened his case.</p>
			<p>“I never refuse!” and the soldier’s wonderful grey eyes smiled. “Thanks⁠—I can manage all right! I am quite expert now.”</p>
			<p>“It is so delightful of you to have come in like this. I want to hear everything⁠—as much as ever you can tell me!” and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters puffed away contentedly.</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—I can talk, as soon as I get going,” he replied laconically, “so long as I don’t have to enlarge on how this thing came my way!” and he motioned towards his decoration. “Thousands ought to have had this reward for expert murder⁠—I happen to be one of the lucky ones!”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters frowned and looked at his visitor a trifle anxiously.</p>
			<p>“It must be a wonderful feeling for you, Harry, to know that you have been able to serve your country so magnificently. How many⁠—if it’s a fair question, did you account for?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know. I stood there for twelve hours⁠—” and a queer smile played on his lips. “The peasants buried the corpses afterwards.”</p>
			<p>“And half the time, I understand, your right arm was useless?”</p>
			<p>“It was my luck to be double-handed⁠—it came in.”</p>
			<p>“A labor of Hercules!” commented the Minister.</p>
			<p>“Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily as unto the Lord, in the Name of Jesus Christ,” said the officer drily.</p>
			<p>Again the Minister frowned, but he said with assumed lightness:</p>
			<p>“It is evident that if I am to get anything out of you, I shall have to cross-examine expertly!”</p>
			<p>“No⁠—I am quite prepared to give you your fill, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters. You deserve it! You see⁠—I should never have gone if it had not been for you. My Star of Honour would shine more brightly on your black coat than on mine!”</p>
			<p>“Ah, well⁠—” said he, half gratified, yet still uncomfortable, “you will be amazed to see the enthusiasm there is in the Church. I may say that we practically think of and work for nothing else save war⁠—whether to help the combatants or to heal the suffering. But this success of yours, will, through God’s blessing, be the very thing we have wanted to raise us to the last height of self-sacrifice!”</p>
			<p>“I hope it will!” said the young man with a curious gravity. “Now then, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters, fire ahead! What do you want to know?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, anything that you have seen yourself or heard. One longs so to realise all that our splendid boys are passing through! And then⁠—well, one can pray better. I suppose it all felt a little uncongenial just at first?”</p>
			<p>“Uncongenial?” The young soldier flicked the ashes from his cigar. “It was not perhaps quite the kind of life I had anticipated. I mean, life at the front has turned out differently from my old boyish visions. Do you remember, I was once absurd enough to think it would be my duty to suggest to the savage of Central Africa that to blow out his brother savage’s brains was not the best way to serve the Great Spirit⁠—to say nothing of the method being stupid and⁠—messy!</p>
			<p>“However, one outgrows one’s youthful idealisms! Suppose I give you five little scenes⁠—I rather want to rehearse them for this evening,” and he held his one hand. Then he looked round suddenly. “There is no one in the room beside ourselves?”</p>
			<p>“No⁠—” exclaimed the Minister, flushing. “That’s all right. Queer though⁠—I had an impression⁠—I have had the same impression out there!”</p>
			<p>The Child listened intently as he stood by the window, but only the summer breeze knew he was there, as she swayed his robes gently.</p>
			<p>“I remember,” he said, with a complete change of manner, “a certain day when we got into the enemy’s continuation trench. It was what you might call a canal of rot. The water was waist-deep⁠—thick with filth and their dead. We managed to plunge through somehow, and mounted our guns, and then⁠—didn’t we give them some lovely bursts? You should have seen the flags go up⁠—all white ones I can tell you. Our artillery was simply fine⁠—why, we lifted a hundred yards of their trenches at a time. We took a lot of prisoners, and as for the dead⁠—well, nothing could have been more satisfactory. We were as chirpy as nightingales when we got back!</p>
			<p>“How will that do for number one, tonight⁠—something mild to start them?”</p>
			<p>The Minister did not make any response. He was completely puzzled at the tone. He fancied uncomfortably that the officer was fooling him. Yet, no⁠—that couldn’t be! That keen intensity of expression forbade the thought.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps you’d like a charge next! They’ll all be keen to know what a charge feels like.</p>
			<p>“I remember the first time ‘At the bayonet’ was shouted, I felt a horrible cold feeling shoot down my spine. The real thing had come! So we laughed out and let the madness have its way⁠—the rage perfect, as one might call it. In a few minutes the field was thick with the enemy dead⁠—our hands and bayonets were dripping blood. I felt hot spots of my brother’s lost life on my face⁠—I tried to wipe it off with my bloody hand, but it stuck! There was a narrow stream of blood running along the barrel of my rifle.</p>
			<p>“I needn’t tell you that it was hell let loose. Their Maxim fire was terrific and our men went down in scores⁠—but we held them⁠—for we went mad with the madness of wild beasts at bay. They fled in the end, crying for mercy⁠—but there was none that day. I remember finding myself facing a great towering chap. He felt to me like Goliath. But he got seven inches of cold steel, I can tell you. The bodies were lying six feet deep, and the shrieks of the dying split the very air, and the wounded⁠—many of them lay buried under the corpses. When we came back, we were horribly splashed with blood and dirt, but⁠—it was grand⁠—the heroic things the fellows did⁠—in the Name of Jesus Christ.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters flung himself upright, as if about to speak, but his guest went on impetuously.</p>
			<p>“No⁠—don’t stop me! Let me give my third while I’m wound up. I might tell you of some of the towns we tried to clear of the enemy. We could watch the clouds of smoke rising⁠—then we knew there was some other big building fired.</p>
			<p>“Some of us grieved a bit to think of the innocent people who were killed and injured. But it couldn’t be helped. Buildings in war are only places to help or hinder the enemy. War is war, as Jesus Christ knew perfectly well, when He gave us the command to go.”</p>
			<p>“That’s rather a poor incident, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters, so I’ll throw in a funny one! Our fellows were playing football, and the shells began getting the range, but nobody cared. I was umpiring for them, and I saw a shell burst in the road and bore a hole big enough to plant an oak⁠—it didn’t burst⁠—they don’t always. The second was luckier. It pitched clean into goal! The men roared, especially as the goalkeeper had decided earlier that the place was getting hot. But the third⁠—it pitched into the next field, where a peasant was ploughing with an ancient horse and a rusty old plough. The horse had its hind leg blown off, and the peasant lost his arm and all the shoulder blade. The shell dug the grave for them both⁠—mercifully.</p>
			<p>“And now⁠—Oh, yes⁠—I remember. There was one time when the enemy had slunk underground in their dugouts, and we timed our attack so rippingly, that when they emerged from their burrows, they found our infantry on top of them. That was our chance! Those who showed fight were bayoneted, but many, seeing we had trapped them, threw away their arms and surrendered. Some howled for mercy and offered us their watches, money, cigars⁠—anything in order to buy their lives.</p>
			<p>“We bayoneted an officer while he was telephoning, and another of our men was so keen that he killed four of them with a shovel as they were trying to escape down a trench. It is wonderful to think what weapons Jesus Christ offers us for His honor’s sake.</p>
			<p>“But here’s the fifth. You should have seen what we called the Furies of the Night! Brown fellows who creep about stealthily like cats in the dark. They love to surprise the enemy in their trenches, and then⁠—their fury works! There is no holding them in, for this is just the kind of warfare that delights them. They tell us that shooting the enemy is like cutting grain⁠—their prowess is absolutely marvellous⁠—only⁠—they are insatiable⁠—always asking when there will be another fight! And as for the trophies they bring in⁠—it is a most gratifying result of our missionary labors in their land! Subscriptions to Missionary Societies should pour in!</p>
			<p>“There now, that is five⁠—but let’s just have a last one in case of an encore!</p>
			<p>“I remember⁠—we came into a wood⁠—the trees were either felled or half-chopped through, and the ground was all muddy clay, in which every few yards or so was a pit several feet deep. It is nice for those at home to know what it looks like, and I may tell you that from end to end of this tangle of dead vegetation and mud there were heaped up thousands of the enemy. They had been lying there for months! There, I think that’s about as much as they’ll want!”</p>
			<p>“But, my dear fellow,” exclaimed the Minister⁠—“you are not going to give all that tonight?”</p>
			<p>“Why not? I want to prove that I have been a good servant of Jesus Christ and followed His directions to the letter!”</p>
			<p>Again the Minister was puzzled.</p>
			<p>“But, it will be a mixed audience⁠—” he began⁠—</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—there is nothing I can tell, that our women-heroines don’t know! If I began on the women⁠—Heaven in the midst of Hell! And some of the parsons⁠—plucky right up to the bayonets!”</p>
			<p>“I am glad to hear that,” said the Minister, hoping he saw a ray in the darkness.</p>
			<p>“Of course there are some experiences one would not tell⁠—for instance⁠—do you remember Neville⁠—young Neville of the Christian Effort Band?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“Well⁠—as a matter of fact⁠—he fell asleep at his post, and⁠—I found him.”</p>
			<p>The Minister remained anxiously silent.</p>
			<p>“I was bound to report it. He was shot!”</p>
			<p>“Never!”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes⁠—” said the officer coolly, “when any man betrays his king and his fellows⁠—he is bound to be shot. It is always dangerous to sleep on duty. The enemy takes us unawares, and the cause is betrayed.”</p>
			<p>“What do you mean, Harry?” The Minister had gone very white. “I don’t understand you. It seems as though you had something in the back of your mind⁠—as though you were saying all this at me rather than to me.”</p>
			<p>The officer gave a laugh. “No, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters, I am only practising for tonight. But there is one point I should like your opinion upon. One day I happened to pass when they were about to shoot a decent old man for having obeyed Christ’s command to feed and shelter his enemies. The man appealed to me⁠—and well⁠—it was a little awkward. Of course, I could do nothing, could I?”</p>
			<p>“You mean the man was a traitor?”</p>
			<p>“That I can’t say. What I mean is that he evidently loved his enemies! Was that a crime?”</p>
			<p>“What did you do?” asked the Minister, ignoring the question.</p>
			<p>“I stood loyally by my commission to do all in the Name of Jesus Christ. I passed by on the other side, and afterwards⁠—I had a vision.”</p>
			<p>“Harry!”</p>
			<p>“Your young men shall see visions and your old men shall dream dreams, you know!” he said lightly. “A Child Angel came to me, and asked me why I had done nothing to help. I suggested naturally that war was war. The Child did not seem satisfied, and he told me that I was calling Light, Darkness, and Darkness, Light, and that it was time I threw down the weapons of Darkness and raised the weapons of Light! And afterwards he took to prophesying that the hour would come when I should have the word and the Church at my feet⁠—and that then I should make the great discovery of Darkness and Light. Funny, wasn’t it?”</p>
			<p>“My dear Harry!”</p>
			<p>The young soldier sprang up. “I must go now, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters. But we shall meet shortly, and I hope the affair will be a tremendous success!”</p>
			<p>“Harry!” appealed the Minister, as he held his hand tightly⁠—“You⁠—you do not regret that you went?”</p>
			<p>“Suppose you were Jesus Christ, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters, would you say to me ‘Well done!’?” But without waiting for a reply, he pulled his hand away and left the room.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
