<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>Therefore the Lord will cut off Israel, head and tail, branch and root in one day.</p>
					<p>The ancient and honorable, he is the head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail. For the leaders of this people cause them to err, and they that are called blessed of them are swallowed up.</p>
					<p>Through the wrath of the Lord of hosts is the land darkened, and the people shall be as the fuel of fire⁠—no man shall spare his brother.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The Child followed David, as he took the path through the wood all burnished with evening glory.</p>
			<p>The sun stared and shot arrows into his eyes, so that even as he closed his lids, his eyeballs burned blood-red.</p>
			<p>“Even the very heavens are aflame from Hell!” he ejaculated, as he re-opened his eyes. “Katie is right! There is no other way! The Prince of the Power of Darkness is become Prince of Light! I throw up the argument. Who am I to stand out against it all?”</p>
			<p>A young officer suddenly broke through the undergrowth and faced him.</p>
			<p>“Hullo!” exclaimed David. “Not a very hearty welcome!” laughed the other, as he took David’s arm familiarly, and strolled along beside him.</p>
			<p>“No⁠—dash you, Bob! I wanted the world to myself!”</p>
			<p>“And you have to share it with me⁠—poor devil! Well⁠—have you come out of the sulks yet?”</p>
			<p>“It is unlucky to ask questions in these days!”</p>
			<p>“These days are getting hot, and it’s about time questions were asked of some people! Not but what we had a most satisfactory time in the village today. They came in like lambs, straight from Church, as you might say. The fact is, the Church and the Bible Class leaders and all the pious religious associations are doing heaps better for us than the pubs! Queer rather. One or two of the boys were a bit doubtful, but we urged the ‘die for your country,’ ‘women and children’⁠—‘liberty,’ and that sort of thing, and we hustled the lot!”</p>
			<p>“Bunkum!” said David, snappily.</p>
			<p>“How dare you! Let me hustle you, old man. You’ll be a sight happier when it’s over.”</p>
			<p>“You’ll never hustle me with the ‘die for your country’ touch. If I go, I’ll chuck the bosh. I’ll go to <em>kill</em> for my country⁠—kill hard⁠—kill devilishly and mercilessly, the more the better. I’ll throw bombs for a week standing, and count my dead by the truck load, and then fling down my Star of Honour at the feet of Jesus Christ, as I part with my last gasp!”</p>
			<p>“Don’t be an ass!” retorted the other.</p>
			<p>“I’m talking simple sense. You know well enough that I never could stand even seeing a terrier kill a rat! But I’m going all right⁠—eyes open. The business is vile, detestable and absolutely stupid; but somehow we are in it, and somebody must do it, so I am going to do it!”</p>
			<p>David tore off his cap and smoothed back his hair.</p>
			<p>“Look here!” said the other anxiously. “What’s the good of doing the tragic? We have a just cause against a nation of fiends, and everything we have ever prayed for is at stake. None of us wants to see his nation go under!”</p>
			<p>“No⁠—none of us wants to see his nation go under!” mused David.</p>
			<p>“They began!” said the officer quickly, “and by Hell, we intend to give them what they asked for!”</p>
			<p>“Exactly! So I have decided to make one more amongst the millions of unwilling men who have no quarrel against one another, but who are set by their rulers to deal out horrible death, mutilation, and madness. There seems to be no other way!” and David quickened his pace involuntarily.</p>
			<p>“My dear chap, we all agree with you. Aren’t we all out against this beastliness? We take up arms to kill war! We hate war quite as much as you⁠—that is,” he added honestly, “of course there is sport in it, hot sport, which appeals to some temperaments. But we were getting a dashed sight too comfortable, and this business has stirred us to life. To see some men, fed up with servants, late to bed, late up, too bored to do anything anybody wanted them to do⁠—now out for any mortal thing⁠—why it’s simply great. There are men in our lot who would once have blushed to be seen with a hair awry, or a tie of yesterday’s pattern, who would wheel a barrow down Club street, or fag away by the week at dull details, and when they get to the front⁠—O David, even you can’t deny it⁠—they are absolutely grand!”</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—yes⁠—it is all grand,” he returned. “Let us go on to the finish by all means. War won’t kill war. It never has, and it never will. But if our country knows no better than to hang on to the apron strings of the Prince of Darkness, in order to win her ideals, well⁠—I’ll hang on too.</p>
			<p>“It shan’t be said that I feared going to the Devil, if that is what my country wants of me. But, by Jove, no man shall ever stop me from saying that I understand the direction in which I am going!”</p>
			<p>“All right⁠—say what you like, so long as you come along! And look here, let me give you a word of comfort. There’s no need to sear your soul by hating the other fellow, when you fight! If you had deigned to come to Church last night⁠—”</p>
			<p>David laughed out hoarsely.</p>
			<p>“I quite understand all that! I’ve heard it in Church so often that I’ve stopped going. Lies hurt more in Church than in other places. But I am going into training to learn how to stick my brother through his vitals, blow him up, drive him mad, teach him how to die of thirst without cursing⁠—all out of the love of my unseared soul! He will quite understand, for his Church will have taught him to do the same to me.”</p>
			<p>“Oh well⁠—never mind all that,” said the other, trying to be patient, “so long as you turn up trumps, old man! You are just the sort we want⁠—a man with brains and ideas. War is a tremendous job. The more I see into it, the more amazed I am that we can do it at all. Why⁠—are you turning back?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I said I should be out to dinner, but I’ve changed my mind. I think I’ll get all this over with my mother. She will be glad to hear that I am going to fight for my King and country.”</p>
			<p>“Ah⁠—” the young officer shook hands painfully with his friend, and they parted.</p>
			<p>“My kingdom is not of this world, else would my servants fight,” whispered the Child.</p>
			<p>David started, and put his hand to his forehead.</p>
			<p>“Who spoke that?”</p>
			<p>“I did,” and the Child touched the man’s hand.</p>
			<p>“Who are you, beautiful Child?”</p>
			<p>“I am a Messenger from Paradise. You are not sure of your weapons. Wait,” he urged.</p>
			<p>“Wait, I cannot wait! This thing has to be done, and there is no other way.”</p>
			<p>“If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, Who giveth liberally and upbraideth not.”</p>
			<p>“I have asked⁠—there is no answer. How can a Child understand?”</p>
			<p>“Yet you will take the Message?” he pleaded. “With the weapons of Love⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No good! No good, Child. I’m sorry, but⁠—”</p>
			<p>David stood suddenly quite still in the path. The Child had gone.</p>
			<p>“Failed!” Soft laughter greeted the Child. He turned quickly, and looked into the mocking eyes of a Son of Fear.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>“No words can say how proud I am of you, my dear boy!” said Lady Forester, as she gripped her son’s hand between her own. “I knew you would do the right thing in the end.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, mother,” he said steadily.</p>
			<p>“God bless you, David!” “No⁠—I won’t weep⁠—for now that I have given my all, I can endure to live.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
